Project Gutenberg's The Soul of Nicholas Snyders, by Jerome K. Jerome

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Soul of Nicholas Snyders
       Or, The Miser Of Zandam

Author: Jerome K. Jerome

Release Date: July 27, 2008 [EBook #869]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SOUL OF NICHOLAS SNYDERS ***




Produced by Ron Burkey, and Amy Thomte





THE SOUL OF NICHOLAS SNYDERS, OR THE MISER OF ZANDAM

By Jerome K. Jerome

Author of "Paul Kelver," "Three Men in a Boat," etc., etc.

NEW YORK DODD, MEAD & COMPANY 1909


COPYRIGHT, 1904, BY JEROME K. JEROME COPYRIGHT, 1908, BY DODD, MEAD &
COMPANY Published, September, 1908




THE SOUL OF NICHOLAS SNYDERS, OR THE MISER OF ZANDAM

Once upon a time in Zandam, which is by the Zuider Zee, there lived a
wicked man named Nicholas Snyders. He was mean and hard and cruel, and
loved but one thing in the world, and that was gold. And even that
not for its own sake. He loved the power gold gave him--the power to
tyrannize and to oppress, the power to cause suffering at his will.
They said he had no soul, but there they were wrong. All men own--or,
to speak more correctly, are owned by--a soul; and the soul of Nicholas
Snyders was an evil soul. He lived in the old windmill which still is
standing on the quay, with only little Christina to wait upon him and
keep house for him. Christina was an orphan whose parents had died in
debt. Nicholas, to Christina's everlasting gratitude, had cleared
their memory--it cost but a few hundred florins--in consideration that
Christina should work for him without wages. Christina formed his entire
household, and only one willing visitor ever darkened his door, the
widow Toelast. Dame Toelast was rich and almost as great a miser as
Nicholas himself. "Why should not we two marry?" Nicholas had once
croaked to the widow Toelast. "Together we should be masters of all
Zandam." Dame Toelast had answered with a cackling laugh; but Nicholas
was never in haste.

One afternoon Nicholas Snyders sat alone at his desk in the centre of
the great semi-circular room that took up half the ground floor of the
windmill, and that served him for an office, and there came a knocking
at the outer door.

"Come in!" cried Nicholas Snyders. He spoke in a tone quite kind for
Nicholas Snyders. He felt so sure it was Jan knocking at the door--Jan
Van der Voort, the young sailor, now master of his own ship, come to
demand of him the hand of little Christina. In anticipation, Nicholas
Snyders tasted the joy of dashing Jan's hopes to the ground; of
hearing him plead, then rave; of watching the growing pallor that
would overspread Jan's handsome face as Nicholas would, point by point,
explain to him the consequences of defiance--how, firstly, Jan's old
mother should be turned out of her home, his old father put into prison
for debt; how, secondly, Jan himself should be pursued without remorse,
his ship be bought over his head before he could complete the purchase.
The interview would afford to Nicholas Snyders sport after his own soul.
Since Jan's return the day before, he had been looking forward to it.
Therefore, feeling sure it was Jan, he cried "Come in!" quite cheerily.

But it was not Jan. It was somebody Nicholas Snyders had never set eyes
on before. And neither, after that one visit, did Nicholas Snyders ever
set eyes upon him again. The light was fading, and Nicholas Snyders was
not the man to light candles before they were needed, so that he was
never able to describe with any precision the stranger's appearance.
Nicholas thought he seemed an old man, but alert in all his movements;
while his eyes--the one thing about him Nicholas saw with any
clearness--were curiously bright and piercing.

"Who are you?" asked Nicholas Snyders, taking no pains to disguise his
disappointment.

"I am a pedlar," answered the stranger. His voice was clear and not
unmusical, with just the suspicion of roguishness behind.

"Not wanting anything," answered Nicholas Snyders drily. "Shut the door
and be careful of the step."

But instead the stranger took a chair and drew it nearer, and, himself
in shadow, looked straight into Nicholas Snyders' face and laughed.

"Are you quite sure, Nicholas Snyders? Are you quite sure there is
nothing you require?"

"Nothing," growled Nicholas Snyders--"except the sight of your back."
The stranger bent forward, and with his long, lean hand touched Nicholas
Snyders playfully upon the knee. "Wouldn't you like a soul, Nicholas
Snyders?" he asked.

"Think of it," continued the strange pedlar, before Nicholas could
recover power of speech. "For forty years you have drunk the joy of
being mean and cruel. Are you not tired of the taste, Nicholas Snyders?
Wouldn't you like a change? Think of it, Nicholas Snyders--the joy of
being loved, of hearing yourself blessed, instead of cursed! Wouldn't
it be good fun, Nicholas Snyders--just by way of a change? If you don't
like it, you can return and be yourself again."

What Nicholas Snyders, recalling all things afterwards, could never
understand was why he sat there, listening in patience to the stranger's
talk; for, at the time, it seemed to him the jesting of a wandering
fool. But something about the stranger had impressed him.

"I have it with me," continued the odd pedlar; "and as for price--" The
stranger made a gesture indicating dismissal of all sordid details.
"I look for my reward in watching the result of the experiment. I am
something of a philosopher. I take an interest in these matters. See."
The stranger dived between his legs and produced from his pack a silver
flask of cunning workmanship and laid it on the table.

"Its flavour is not unpleasant," explained the stranger. "A little
bitter; but one does not drink it by the goblet: a wineglassful, such
as one would of old Tokay, while the mind of both is fixed on the
same thought: 'May my soul pass into him, may his pass into me!'
The operation is quite simple: the secret lies within the drug." The
stranger patted the quaint flask as though it had been some little dog.

"You will say: 'Who will exchange souls with Nicholas Snyders?'" The
stranger appeared to have come prepared with an answer to all questions.
"My friend, you are rich; you need not fear. It is the possession
men value the least of all they have. Choose your soul and drive your
bargain. I leave that to you with one word of counsel only: you will
find the young readier than the old--the young, to whom the world
promises all things for gold. Choose you a fine, fair, fresh, young
soul, Nicholas Snyders; and choose it quickly. Your hair is somewhat
grey, my friend. Taste, before you die, the joy of living."

The strange pedlar laughed and, rising, closed his pack. Nicholas
Snyders neither moved nor spoke, until with the soft clanging of the
massive door his senses returned to him. Then, seizing the flask the
stranger had left behind him, he sprang from his chair, meaning to fling
it after him into the street. But the flashing of the firelight on its
burnished surface stayed his hand.

"After all, the case is of value," Nicholas chuckled, and put the flask
aside and, lighting the two tall candles, buried himself again in his
green-bound ledger. Yet still from time to time Nicholas Snyders' eye
would wander to where the silver flask remained half hidden among dusty
papers. And later there came again a knocking at the door, and this time
it really was young Jan who entered.

Jan held out his great hand across the littered desk.

"We parted in anger, Nicholas Snyders. It was my fault. You were in the
right. I ask you to forgive me. I was poor. It was selfish of me to
wish the little maid to share with me my poverty. But now I am no longer
poor."

"Sit down," responded Nicholas in kindly tone. "I have heard of it. So
now you are master and the owner of your ship--your very own."

"My very own after one more voyage," laughed Jan. "I have Burgomaster
Allart's promise."

"A promise is not a performance," hinted Nicholas. "Burgomaster Allart
is not a rich man; a higher bid might tempt him. Another might step in
between you and become the owner."

Jan only laughed. "Why, that would be the work of an enemy, which, God
be praised, I do not think that I possess."

"Lucky lad!" commented Nicholas; "so few of us are without enemies. And
your parents, Jan, will they live with you?"

"We wished it," answered Jan, "both Christina and I. But the mother is
feeble. The old mill has grown into her life."

"I can understand," agreed Nicholas. "The old vine torn from the old
wall withers. And your father, Jan; people will gossip. The mill is
paying?"

Jan shook his head. "It never will again; and the debts haunt him. But
all that, as I tell him, is a thing of the past. His creditors have
agreed to look to me and wait."

"All of them?" queried Nicholas.

"All of them I could discover," laughed Jan.

Nicholas Snyders pushed back his chair and looked at Jan with a smile
upon his wrinkled face. "And so you and Christina have arranged it all?"

"With your consent, sir," answered Jan.

"You will wait for that?" asked Nicholas.

"We should like to have it, sir." Jan smiled, but the tone of his voice
fell agreeably on Nicholas Snyders' ear. Nicholas Snyders loved best
beating the dog that, growled and showed its teeth.

"Better not wait for that," said Nicholas Snyders. "You might have to
wait long."

Jan rose, an angry flush upon his face. "So nothing changes you,
Nicholas Snyders. Have it your own way, then."

"You will marry her in spite of me?"

"In spite of you and of your friends the fiends, and of your master the
Devil!" flung out Jan. For Jan had a soul that was generous and brave
and tender and excessively short-tempered. Even the best of souls have
their failings.

"I am sorry," said old Nicholas.

"I am glad to hear it," answered Jan.

"I am sorry for your mother," explained Nicholas. "The poor dame, I
fear, will be homeless in her old age. The mortgage shall be foreclosed,
Jan, on your wedding-day. I am sorry for your father, Jan. His
creditors, Jan--you have overlooked just one. I am sorry for him, Jan.
Prison has always been his dread. I am sorry even for you, my young
friend. You will have to begin life over again. Burgomaster Allart is in
the hollow of my hand. I have but to say the word, your ship is mine.
I wish you joy of your bride, my young friend. You must love her very
dearly--you will be paying a high price for her."

It was Nicholas Snyders' grin that maddened Jan. He sought for something
that, thrown straight at the wicked mouth, should silence it, and
by chance his hand lighted on the pedlar's silver flask. In the same
instance Nicholas Snyders' hand had closed upon it also. The grin had
died away.

"Sit down," commanded Nicholas Snyders. "Let us talk further." And there
was that in his voice that compelled the younger man's obedience.

"You wonder, Jan, why I seek always anger and hatred. I wonder at times
myself. Why do generous thoughts never come to me, as to other men!
Listen, Jan; I am in a whimsical mood. Such things cannot be, but it is
a whim of mine to think it might have been. Sell me your soul, Jan, sell
me your soul, that I, too, may taste this love and gladness that I hear
about. For a little while, Jan, only for a little while, and I will give
you all you desire."

The old man seized his pen and wrote.

"See, Jan, the ship is yours beyond mishap; the mill goes free; your
father may hold up his head again. And all I ask, Jan, is that you drink
to me, willing the while that your soul may go from you and become the
soul of old Nicholas Snyders--for a little while, Jan, only for a little
while."

With feverish hands the old man had drawn the stopper from the pedlar's
flagon, had poured the wine into twin glasses. Jan's inclination was to
laugh, but the old man's eagerness was almost frenzy. Surely he was mad;
but that would not make less binding the paper he had signed. A true man
does not jest with his soul, but the face of Christina was shining down
on Jan from out the gloom.

"You will mean it?" whispered Nicholas Snyders.

"May my soul pass from me and enter into Nicholas Snyders!" answered
Jan, replacing his empty glass upon the table. And the two stood looking
for a moment into one another's eyes.

And the high candles on the littered desk flickered and went out, as
though a breath had blown them, first one and then the other.

"I must be getting home," came the voice of Jan from the darkness. "Why
did you blow out the candles?"

"We can light them again from the fire," answered Nicholas. He did not
add that he had meant to ask that same question of Jan. He thrust them
among the glowing logs, first one and then the other; and the shadows
crept back into their corners.

"You will not stop and see Christina?" asked Nicholas.

"Not to-night," answered Jan.

"The paper that I signed," Nicholas reminded him--"you have it?"

"I had forgotten it," Jan answered.

The old man took it from the desk and handed it to him. Jan thrust it
into his pocket and went out. Nicholas bolted the door behind him and
returned to his desk; sat long there, his elbow resting on the open
ledger.

Nicholas pushed the ledger aside and laughed. "What foolery! As if such
things could be! The fellow must have bewitched me."

Nicholas crossed to the fire and warmed his hands before the blaze.
"Still, I am glad he is going to marry the little lass. A good lad, a
good lad."

Nicholas must have fallen asleep before the fire. When he opened his
eyes, it was to meet the grey dawn. He felt cold, stiff, hungry, and
decidedly cross. Why had not Christina woke him up and given him his
supper. Did she think he had intended to pass the night on a wooden
chair? The girl was an idiot. He would go upstairs and tell her through
the door just what he thought of her.

His way upstairs led through the kitchen. To his astonishment, there sat
Christina, asleep before the burnt-out grate.

"Upon my word," muttered Nicholas to himself, "people in this house
don't seem to know what beds are for!"

But it was not Christina, so Nicholas told himself. Christina had the
look of a frightened rabbit: it had always irritated him. This girl,
even in her sleep, wore an impertinent expression--a delightfully
impertinent expression. Besides, this girl was pretty--marvellously
pretty. Indeed, so pretty a girl Nicholas had never seen in all his life
before. Why had the girls, when Nicholas was young, been so entirely
different! A sudden bitterness seized Nicholas: it was as though he had
just learnt that long ago, without knowing it, he had been robbed.

The child must be cold. Nicholas fetched his fur-lined cloak and wrapped
it about her.

There was something else he ought to do. The idea came to him while
drawing the cloak around her shoulders, very gently, not to disturb
her--something he wanted to do, if only he could think what it was. The
girl's lips were parted. She appeared to be speaking to him, asking him
to do this thing--or telling him not to do it. Nicholas could not be
sure which. Half a dozen times he turned away, and half a dozen times
stole back to where she sat sleeping with that delightfully impertinent
expression on her face, her lips parted. But what she wanted, or what it
was he wanted, Nicholas could not think.

Perhaps Christina would know. Perhaps Christina would know who she was
and how she got there. Nicholas climbed the stairs, swearing at them for
creaking.

Christina's door was open. No one was in the room; the bed had not been
slept upon. Nicholas descended the creaking stairs.

The girl was still asleep. Could it be Christina herself? Nicholas
examined the delicious features one by one. Never before, so far as he
could recollect, had he seen the girl; yet around her neck--Nicholas had
not noticed it before--lay Christina's locket, rising and falling as she
breathed. Nicholas knew it well; the one thing belonging to her mother
Christina had insisted on keeping. The one thing about which she had
ever defied him. She would never have parted with that locket. It must
be Christina herself. But what had happened to her? Or to himself.
Remembrance rushed in upon him. The odd pedlar! The scene with Jan! But
surely all that had been a dream? Yet there upon the littered desk still
stood the pedlar's silver flask, together with the twin stained glasses.

Nicholas tried to think, but his brain was in a whirl. A ray of sunshine
streaming through the window fell across the dusty room. Nicholas had
never seen the sun, that he could recollect. Involuntarily he stretched
his hands towards it, felt a pang of grief when it vanished, leaving
only the grey light. He drew the rusty bolts, flung open the great door.
A strange world lay before him, a new world of lights and shadows, that
wooed him with their beauty--a world of low, soft voices that called to
him. There came to him again that bitter sense of having been robbed.

"I could have been so happy all these years," murmured old Nicholas to
himself. "It is just the little town I could have loved--so quaint, so
quiet, so homelike. I might have had friends, old cronies, children of
my own maybe--"

A vision of the sleeping Christina flashed before his eyes. She had come
to him a child, feeling only gratitude towards him. Had he had eyes with
which to see her, all things might have been different.

Was it too late? He is not so old--not so very old. New life is in his
veins. She still loves Jan, but that was the Jan of yesterday. In the
future, Jan's every word and deed will be prompted by the evil soul that
was once the soul of Nicholas Snyders--that Nicholas Snyders remembers
well. Can any woman love that, let the case be as handsome as you will?

Ought he, as an honest man, to keep the soul he had won from Jan by what
might be called a trick? Yes, it had been a fair bargain, and Jan had
taken his price. Besides, it was not as if Jan had fashioned his own
soul; these things are chance. Why should one man be given gold, and
another be given parched peas? He has as much right to Jan's soul as Jan
ever had. He is wiser, he can do more good with it. It was Jan's soul
that loved Christina; let Jan's soul win her if it can. And Jan's
soul, listening to the argument, could not think of a word to offer in
opposition.

Christina was still asleep when Nicholas re-entered the kitchen. He
lighted the fire and cooked the breakfast and then aroused her gently.
There was no doubt it was Christina. The moment her eyes rested on old
Nicholas, there came back to her the frightened rabbit look that had
always irritated him. It irritated him now, but the irritation was
against himself.

"You were sleeping so soundly when I came in last night--" Christina
commenced.

"And you were afraid to wake me," Nicholas interrupted her. "You thought
the old curmudgeon would be cross. Listen, Christina. You paid off
yesterday the last debt your father owed. It was to an old sailor--I had
not been able to find him before. Not a cent more do you owe, and
there remains to you, out of your wages, a hundred florins. It is yours
whenever you like to ask me for it."

Christina could not understand, neither then nor during the days that
followed; nor did Nicholas enlighten her. For the soul of Jan had
entered into a very wise old man, who knew that the best way to live
down the past is to live boldly the present. All that Christina could
be sure of was that the old Nicholas Snyders had mysteriously vanished,
that in his place remained a new Nicholas, who looked at her with kindly
eyes--frank and honest, compelling confidence. Though Nicholas never
said so, it came to Christina that she herself, her sweet example, her
ennobling influence it was that had wrought this wondrous change. And to
Christina the explanation seemed not impossible--seemed even pleasing.

The sight of his littered desk was hateful to him. Starting early in the
morning, Nicholas would disappear for the entire day, returning in the
evening tired but cheerful, bringing with him flowers that Christina
laughed at, telling him they were weeds. But what mattered names? To
Nicholas they were beautiful. In Zandam the children ran from him,
the dogs barked after him. So Nicholas, escaping through byways, would
wander far into the country. Children in the villages around came to
know a kind old fellow who loved to linger, his hands resting on his
staff, watching their play, listening to their laughter; whose ample
pockets were storehouses of good things. Their elders, passing by, would
whisper to one another how like he was in features to wicked old Nick,
the miser of Zandam, and would wonder where he came from. Nor was
it only the faces of the children that taught his lips to smile. It
troubled him at first to find the world so full of marvellously pretty
girls--of pretty women also, all more or less lovable. It bewildered
him. Until he found that, notwithstanding, Christina remained always
in his thoughts the prettiest, the most lovable of them all. Then every
pretty face rejoiced him: it reminded him of Christina.

On his return the second day, Christina had met him with sadness in her
eyes. Farmer Beerstraater, an old friend of her father's, had called to
see Nicholas; not finding Nicholas, had talked a little with Christina.
A hardhearted creditor was turning him out of his farm. Christina
pretended not to know that the creditor was Nicholas himself, but
marvelled that such wicked men could be. Nicholas said nothing, but the
next day Farmer Beerstraater had called again, all smiles, blessings,
and great wonder.

"But what can have come to him?" repeated Farmer Beerstraater over and
over.

Christina had smiled and answered that perhaps the good God had touched
his heart; but thought to herself that perhaps it had been the good
influence of another. The tale flew. Christina found herself besieged on
every hand, and, finding her intercessions invariably successful, grew
day by day more pleased with herself, and by consequence more pleased
with Nicholas Snyders. For Nicholas was a cunning old gentleman. Jan's
soul in him took delight in undoing the evil the soul of Nicholas
had wrought. But the brain of Nicholas Snyders that remained to him
whispered: "Let the little maid think it is all her doing."

The news reached the ears of Dame Toelast. The same evening saw her
seated in the inglenook opposite Nicholas Snyders, who smoked and seemed
bored.

"You are making a fool of yourself, Nicholas Snyders," the Dame told
him. "Everybody is laughing at you."

"I had rather they laughed than cursed me," growled Nicholas.

"Have you forgotten all that has passed between us?" demanded the Dame.

"Wish I could," sighed Nicholas.

"At your age--" commenced the Dame.

"I am feeling younger than I ever felt in all my life," Nicholas
interrupted her.

"You don't look it," commented the Dame.

"What do looks matter?" snapped Nicholas. "It is the soul of a man that
is the real man."

"They count for something, as the world goes," explained the Dame. "Why,
if I liked to follow your example and make a fool of myself, there are
young men, fine young men, handsome young men--"

"Don't let me stand in your way," interposed Nicholas quickly. "As you
say, I am old and I have a devil of a temper. There must be many better
men than I am, men more worthy of you."

"I don't say there are not," returned the Dame: "but nobody more
suitable. Girls for boys, and old women for old men. I haven't lost my
wits, Nicholas Snyders, if you have. When you are yourself again--"

Nicholas Snyders sprang to his feet. "I am myself," he cried, "and
intend to remain myself! Who dares say I am not myself?"

"I do," retorted the Dame with exasperating coolness. "Nicholas Snyders
is not himself when at the bidding of a pretty-faced doll he flings his
money out of the window with both hands. He is a creature bewitched, and
I am sorry for him. She'll fool you for the sake of her friends till
you haven't a cent left, and then she'll laugh at you. When you are
yourself, Nicholas Snyders, you will be crazy with yourself--remember
that." And Dame Toelast marched out and slammed the door behind her.

"Girls for boys, and old women for old men." The phrase kept ringing in
his ears. Hitherto his new-found happiness had filled his life, leaving
no room for thought. But the old Dame's words had sown the seed of
reflection.

Was Christina fooling him? The thought was impossible. Never once had
she pleaded for herself, never once for Jan. The evil thought was the
creature of Dame Toelast's evil mind. Christina loved him. Her face
brightened at his coming. The fear of him had gone out of her; a pretty
tyranny had replaced it. But was it the love that he sought? Jan's soul
in old Nick's body was young and ardent. It desired Christina not as a
daughter, but as a wife. Could it win her in spite of old Nick's body?
The soul of Jan was an impatient soul. Better to know than to doubt.

"Do not light the candles; let us talk a little by the light of the fire
only," said Nicholas. And Christina, smiling, drew her chair towards the
blaze. But Nicholas sat in the shadow.

"You grow more beautiful every day, Christina," said Nicholas-"sweeter
and more womanly. He will be a happy man who calls you wife."

The smile passed from Christina's face. "I shall never marry," she
answered. "Never is a long word, little one."

"A true woman does not marry the man she does not love."

"But may she not marry the man she does?" smiled Nicholas.

"Sometimes she may not," Christina explained.

"And when is that?"

Christina's face was turned away. "When he has ceased to love her."

The soul in old Nick's body leapt with joy. "He is not worthy of you,
Christina. His new fortune has changed him. Is it not so? He thinks only
of money. It is as though the soul of a miser had entered into him.
He would marry even Dame Toelast for the sake of her gold-bags and her
broad lands and her many mills, if only she would have him. Cannot you
forget him?"

"I shall never forget him. I shall never love another man. I try to hide
it; and often I am content to find there is so much in the world that
I can do. But my heart is breaking." She rose and, kneeling beside him,
clasped her hands around him. "I am glad you have let me tell you," she
said. "But for you I could not have borne it. You are so good to me."

For answer he stroked with his withered hand the golden hair that fell
disordered about his withered knees. She raised her eyes to him; they
were filled with tears, but smiling.

"I cannot understand," she said. "I think sometimes that you and he must
have changed souls. He is hard and mean and cruel, as you used to be."
She laughed, and the arms around him tightened for a moment. "And now
you are kind and tender and great, as once he was. It is as if the good
God had taken away my lover from me to give to me a father."

"Listen to me, Christina," he said. "It is the soul that is the man, not
the body. Could you not love me for my new soul?"

"But I do love you," answered Christina, smiling through her tears.

"Could you as a husband?" The firelight fell upon her face. Nicholas,
holding it between his withered hands, looked into it long and hard; and
reading what he read there, laid it back against his breast and soothed
it with his withered hand.

"I was jesting, little one," he said. "Girls for boys, and old women for
old men. And so, in spite of all, you still love Jan?"

"I love him," answered Christina. "I cannot help it."

"And if he would, you would marry him, let his soul be what it may?"

"I love him," answered Christina. "I cannot help it."

Old Nicholas sat alone before the dying fire. Is it the soul or the body
that is the real man? The answer was not so simple as he had thought it.

"Christina loved Jan"--so Nicholas mumbled to the dying fire--"when
he had the soul of Jan. She loves him still, though he has the soul of
Nicholas Snyders. When I asked her if she could love me, it was terror
I read in her eyes, though Jan's soul is now in me; she divined it. It
must be the body that is the real Jan, the real Nicholas. If the soul
of Christina entered into the body of Dame Toelast, should I turn from
Christina, from her golden hair, her fathomless eyes, her asking lips,
to desire the shrivelled carcass of Dame Toelast? No; I should still
shudder at the thought of her. Yet when I had the soul of Nicholas
Snyders, I did not loathe her, while Christina was naught to me. It must
be with the soul that we love, else Jan would still love Christina and
I should be Miser Nick. Yet here am I loving Christina, using Nicholas
Snyders' brain and gold to thwart Nicholas Snyders' every scheme, doing
everything that I know will make him mad when he comes back into his own
body; while Jan cares no longer for Christina, would marry Dame Toelast
for her broad lands, her many mills. Clearly it is the soul that is the
real man. Then ought I not to be glad, thinking I am going back into my
own body, knowing that I shall wed Christina? But I am not glad; I am
very miserable. I shall not go with Jan's soul, I feel it; my own soul
will come back to me. I shall be again the hard, cruel, mean old man I
was before, only now I shall be poor and helpless. The folks will laugh
at me, and I shall curse them, powerless to do them evil. Even Dame
Toelast will not want me when she learns all. And yet I must do this
thing. So long as Jan's soul is in me, I love Christina better than
myself. I must do this for her sake. I love her--I cannot help it."

Old Nicholas rose, took from the place, where a month before he had
hidden it, the silver flask of cunning workmanship.

"Just two more glassfuls left," mused Nicholas, as he gently shook the
flask against his ear. He laid it on the desk before him, then opened
once again the old green ledger, for there still remained work to be
done.

He woke Christina early. "Take these letters, Christina," he commanded.
"When you have delivered them all, but not before, go to Jan; tell him
I am waiting here to see him on a matter of business." He kissed her and
seemed loth to let her go.

"I shall only be a little while," smiled Christina.

"All partings take but a little while," he answered.

Old Nicholas had foreseen the trouble he would have. Jan was content,
had no desire to be again a sentimental young fool, eager to saddle
himself with a penniless wife. Jan had other dreams.

"Drink, man, drink!" cried Nicholas impatiently, "before I am tempted to
change my mind. Christina, provided you marry her, is the richest bride
in Zandam. There is the deed; read it; and read quickly."

Then Jan consented, and the two men drank. And there passed a breath
between them as before; and Jan with his hands covered his eyes a
moment.

It was a pity, perhaps, that he did so, for in that moment Nicholas
snatched at the deed that lay beside Jan on the desk. The next instant
it was blazing in the fire.

"Not so poor as you thought!" came the croaking voice of Nicholas. "Not
so poor as you thought! I can build again, I can build again!" And the
creature, laughing hideously, danced with its withered arms spread out
before the blaze, lest Jan should seek to rescue Christina's burning
dowry before it was destroyed.

Jan did not tell Christina. In spite of all Jan could say, she would go
back. Nicholas Snyders drove her from the door with curses. She could
not understand. The only thing clear was that Jan had come back to her.

"'Twas a strange madness that seized upon me," Jan explained. "Let the
good sea breezes bring us health."

So from the deck of Jan's ship they watched old Zandam till it vanished
into air.

Christina cried a little at the thought of never seeing it again; but
Jan comforted her and later new faces hid the old.

And old Nicholas married Dame Toelast, but, happily, lived to do evil
only for a few years longer.

Long after, Jan told Christina the whole story, but it sounded very
improbable, and Christina--though, of course, she did not say so--did
not quite believe it, but thought Jan was trying to explain away that
strange month of his life during which he had wooed Dame Toelast. Yet it
certainly was strange that Nicholas, for the same short month, had been
so different from his usual self.

"Perhaps," thought Christina, "if I had not told him I loved Jan, he
would not have gone back to his old ways. Poor old gentleman! No doubt
it was despair."





End of Project Gutenberg's The Soul of Nicholas Snyders, by Jerome K. Jerome

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SOUL OF NICHOLAS SNYDERS ***

***** This file should be named 869.txt or 869.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/6/869/

Produced by Ron Burkey, and Amy Thomte

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
