Project Gutenberg's Lemorne Versus Huell, by Elizabeth Drew Stoddard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Lemorne Versus Huell

Author: Elizabeth Drew Stoddard

Posting Date: July 27, 2008 [EBook #881]
Release Date: April 1997

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEMORNE VERSUS HUELL ***




Produced by John M. Krafft





LEMORNE VERSUS HUELL

Elizabeth Drew Stoddard

Harper's New Monthly Magazine 26 (1863): 537-43.


The two months I spent at Newport with Aunt Eliza Huell, who had been
ordered to the sea-side for the benefit of her health, were the
months that created all that is dramatic in my destiny. My aunt was
troublesome, for she was not only out of health, but in a lawsuit. She
wrote to me, for we lived apart, asking me to accompany her--not because
she was fond of me, or wished to give me pleasure, but because I
was useful in various ways. Mother insisted upon my accepting her
invitation, not because she loved her late husband's sister, but because
she thought it wise to cotton to her in every particular, for Aunt Eliza
was rich, and we--two lone women--were poor.

I gave my music-pupils a longer and earlier vacation than usual, took a
week to arrange my wardrobe--for I made my own dresses--and then started
for New York, with the five dollars which Aunt Eliza had sent for my
fare thither. I arrived at her house in Bond Street at 7 A.M., and found
her man James in conversation with the milkman. He informed me that
Miss Huell was very bad, and that the housekeeper was still in bed. I
supposed that Aunt Eliza was in bed also, but I had hardly entered the
house when I heard her bell ring as she only could ring it--with an
impatient jerk.

"She wants hot milk," said James, "and the man has just come."

I laid my bonnet down, and went to the kitchen. Saluting the cook, who
was an old acquaintance, and who told me that the "divil" had been in
the range that morning, I took a pan, into which I poured some milk, and
held it over the gaslight till it was hot; then I carried it up to Aunt
Eliza.

"Here is your milk, Aunt Eliza. You have sent for me to help you, and I
begin with the earliest opportunity."

"I looked for you an hour ago. Ring the bell."

I rang it.

"Your mother is well, I suppose. She would have sent you, though, had
she been sick in bed."

"She has done so. She thinks better of my coming than I do."

The housekeeper, Mrs. Roll, came in, and Aunt Eliza politely requested
her to have breakfast for her niece as soon as possible.

"I do not go down of mornings yet," said Aunt Eliza, "but Mrs. Roll
presides. See that the coffee is good, Roll."

"It is good generally, Miss Huell."

"You see that Margaret brought me my milk."

"Ahem!" said Mrs. Roll, marching out.

At the beginning of each visit to Aunt Eliza I was in the habit of
dwelling on the contrast between her way of living and ours. We lived
from "hand to mouth." Every thing about her wore a hereditary air; for
she lived in my grandfather's house, and it was the same as in his day.
If I was at home when these contrasts occurred to me I should have felt
angry; as it was, I felt them as in a dream--the china, the silver, the
old furniture, and the excellent fare soothed me.

In the middle of the day Aunt Eliza came down stairs, and after she had
received a visit from her doctor, decided to go to Newport on Saturday.
It was Wednesday; and I could, if I chose, make any addition to my
wardrobe. I had none to make, I informed her. What were my dresses?--had
I a black silk? she asked. I had no black silk, and thought one would be
unnecessary for hot weather.

"Who ever heard of a girl of twenty-four having no black silk! You have
slimsy muslins, I dare say?"

"Yes."

"And you like them?"

"For present wear."

That afternoon she sent Mrs. Roll out, who returned with a splendid
heavy silk for me, which Aunt Eliza said should be made before Saturday,
and it was. I went to a fashionable dress-maker of her recommending, and
on Friday it came home, beautifully made and trimmed with real lace.

"Even the Pushers could find no fault with this," said Aunt Eliza,
turning over the sleeves and smoothing the lace. Somehow she smuggled
into the house a white straw-bonnet, with white roses; also a handsome
mantilla. She held the bonnet before me with a nod, and deposited it
again in the box, which made a part of the luggage for Newport.

On Sunday morning we arrived in Newport, and went to a quiet hotel in
the town. James was with us, but Mrs. Roll was left in Bond Street,
in charge of the household. Monday was spent in an endeavor to make
an arrangement regarding the hire of a coach and coachman. Several
livery-stable keepers were in attendance, but nothing was settled, till
I suggested that Aunt Eliza should send for her own carriage. James was
sent back the next day, and returned on Thursday with coach, horses, and
William her coachman. That matter being finished, and the trunks being
unpacked, she decided to take her first bath in the sea, expecting me to
support her through the trying ordeal of the surf. As we were returning
from the beach we met a carriage containing a number of persons with a
family resemblance.

When Aunt Eliza saw them she angrily exclaimed, "Am I to see those
Uxbridges every day?"

Of the Uxbridges this much I knew--that the two brothers Uxbridge were
the lawyers of her opponents in the lawsuit which had existed three or
four years. I had never felt any interest in it, though I knew that it
was concerning a tract of ground in the city which had belonged to
my grandfather, and which had, since his day, become very valuable.
Litigation was a habit of the Huell family. So the sight of the Uxbridge
family did not agitate me as it did Aunt Eliza.

"The sly, methodical dogs! but I shall beat Lemorne yet!"

"How will you amuse yourself then, aunt?"

"I'll adopt some boys to inherit what I shall save from his clutches."

The bath fatigued her so she remained in her room for the rest of the
day; but she kept me busy with a hundred trifles. I wrote for her,
computed interest, studied out bills of fare, till four o'clock came,
and with it a fog. Nevertheless I must ride on the Avenue, and the
carriage was ordered.

"Wear your silk, Margaret; it will just about last your visit
through--the fog will use it up."

"I am glad of it," I answered.

"You will ride every day. Wear the bonnet I bought for you also."

"Certainly; but won't that go quicker in the fog than the dress?"

"Maybe; but wear it."

I rode every day afterward, from four to six, in the black silk, the
mantilla, and the white straw. When Aunt Eliza went she was so on the
alert for the Uxbridge family carriage that she could have had little
enjoyment of the ride. Rocks never were a passion with her, she said,
nor promontories, chasms, or sand. She came to Newport to be washed
with salt-water; when she had washed up to the doctor's prescription she
should leave, as ignorant of the peculiar pleasures of Newport as
when she arrived. She had no fancy for its conglomerate societies, its
literary cottages, its parvenue suits of rooms, its saloon habits, and
its bathing herds.

I considered the rides a part of the contract of what was expected in my
two months' performance. I did not dream that I was enjoying them, any
more than I supposed myself to be enjoying a sea-bath while pulling Aunt
Eliza to and fro in the surf. Nothing in the life around me stirred me,
nothing in nature attracted me. I liked the fog; somehow it seemed to
emanate from me instead of rolling up from the ocean, and to represent
me. Whether I went alone or not, the coachman was ordered to drive a
certain round; after that I could extend the ride in whatever direction
I pleased, but I always said, "Anywhere, William." One afternoon, which
happened to be a bright one, I was riding on the road which led to the
glen, when I heard the screaming of a flock of geese which were waddling
across the path in front of the horses. I started, for I was asleep
probably, and, looking forward, saw the Uxbridge carriage, filled with
ladies and children, coming toward me; and by it rode a gentleman on
horseback. His horse was rearing among the hissing geese, but neither
horse nor geese appeared to engage him; his eyes were fixed upon me. The
horse swerved so near that its long mane almost brushed against me. By
an irresistible impulse I laid my ungloved hand upon it, but did not
look at the rider. Carriage and horseman passed on, and William resumed
his pace. A vague idea took possession of me that I had seen the
horseman before on my various drives. I had a vision of a man galloping
on a black horse out of the fog, and into it again. I was very sure,
however, that I had never seen him on so pleasant a day as this! William
did not bring his horses to time; it was after six when I went into Aunt
Eliza's parlor, and found her impatient for her tea and toast. She was
crosser than the occasion warranted; but I understood it when she gave
me the outlines of a letter she desired me to write to her lawyer in
New York. Something had turned up, he had written her; the Uxbridges
believed that they had ferreted out what would go against her. I told
her that I had met the Uxbridge carriage.

"One of them is in New York; how else could they be giving me trouble
just now?"

"There was a gentleman on horseback beside the carriage."

"Did he look mean and cunning?"

"He did not wear his legal beaver up, I think; but he rode a fine horse
and sat it well."

"A lawyer on horseback should, like the beggar of the adage, ride to the
devil."

"Your business now is the 'Lemorne?'"

"You know it is."

"I did not know but that you had found something besides to litigate."

"It must have been Edward Uxbridge that you saw. He is the brain of the
firm."

"You expect Mr. Van Horn?"

"Oh, he must come; I can not be writing letters."

We had been in Newport two weeks when Mr. Van Horn, Aunt Eliza's lawyer,
came. He said that he would see Mr. Edward Uxbridge. Between them they
might delay a term, which he thought would be best. "Would Miss Huell
ever be ready for a compromise?" he jestingly asked.

"Are you suspicious?" she inquired.

"No; but the Uxbridge chaps are clever."

He dined with us; and at four o'clock Aunt Eliza graciously asked him
to take a seat in the carriage with me, making some excuse for not going
herself.

"Hullo!" said Mr. Van Horn when we had reached the country road;
"there's Uxbridge now." And he waved his hand to him.

It was indeed the black horse and the same rider that I had met. He
reined up beside us, and shook hands with Mr. Van Horn.

"We are required to answer this new complaint?" said Mr. Van Horn.

Mr. Uxbridge nodded.

"And after that the judgment?"

Mr. Uxbridge laughed.

"I wish that certain gore of land had been sunk instead of being mapped
in 1835."


"The surveyor did his business well enough, I am sure."

They talked together in a low voice for a few minutes, and then Mr. Van
Horn leaned back in his seat again. "Allow me," he said, "to introduce
you, Uxbridge, to Miss Margaret Huell, Miss Huell's niece. Huell _vs._
Brown, you know," he added, in an explanatory tone; for I was Huell
_vs._ Brown's daughter. "Oh!" said Mr. Uxbridge bowing, and looking at
me gravely. I looked at him also; he was a pale, stern-looking man, and
forty years old certainly. I derived the impression at once that he had
a domineering disposition, perhaps from the way in which he controlled
his horse.

"Nice beast that," said Mr. Van Horn.

"Yes," he answered, laying his hand on its mane, so that the action
brought immediately to my mind the recollection that I had done so too.
I would not meet his eye again, however.

"How long shall you remain, Uxbridge?"

"I don't know. You are not interested in the lawsuit, Miss Huell?" he
said, putting on his hat.

"Not in the least; nothing of mine is involved."

"We'll gain it for your portion yet, Miss Margaret," said Mr. Van Horn,
nodding to Mr. Uxbridge, and bidding William drive on. He returned the
next day, and we settled into the routine of hotel life. A few mornings
after, she sent me to a matinee, which was given by some of the Opera
people, who were in Newport strengthening the larynx with applications
of brine. When the concert was half over, and the audience were making
the usual hum and stir, I saw Mr. Uxbridge against a pillar, with his
hands incased in pearl-colored gloves, and holding a shiny hat. He
turned half away when he caught my eye, and then darted toward me.

"You have not been much more interested in the music than you are in the
lawsuit," he said, seating himself beside me.

"The _tutoyer_ of the Italian voice is agreeable, however."

"It makes one dreamy."

"A child."

"Yes, a child; not a man nor a woman."

"I teach music. I can not dream over 'one, two, three.'"


"_You_--a music teacher!"

"For six years."

I was aware that he looked at me from head to foot, and I picked at the
lace on my invariable black silk; but what did it matter whether I owned
that I was a genteel pauper, representing my aunt's position for two
months, or not?

"Where?"

"In Waterbury."

"Waterbury differs from Newport."

"I suppose so."

"You suppose!"

A young gentleman sauntered by us, and Mr. Uxbridge called to him to
look up the Misses Uxbridge, his nieces, on the other side of the hall.

"Paterfamilias Uxbridge has left his brood in my charge," he said. "I
try to do my duty," and he held out a twisted pearl-colored glove, which
he had pulled off while talking. What white nervous fingers he had! I
thought they might pinch like steel.

"You suppose," he repeated.

"I do not look at Newport."

"Have you observed Waterbury?"

"I observe what is in my sphere."

"Oh!"

He was silent then. The second part of the concert began; but I could
not compose myself to appreciation. Either the music or I grew chaotic.
So many tumultuous sounds I heard--of hope, doubt, inquiry, melancholy,
and desire; or did I feel the emotions which these words express? Or was
there magnetism stealing into me from the quiet man beside me? He left
me with a bow before the concert was over, and I saw him making his way
out of the hall when it was finished.

I had been sent in the carriage, of course; but several carriages were
in advance of it before the walk, and I waited there for William to
drive up. When he did so, I saw by the oscillatory motion of his
head, though his arms and whiphand were perfectly correct, that he was
inebriated. It was his first occasion of meeting fellow-coachmen in full
dress, and the occasion had proved too much for him. My hand, however,
was on the coach door, when I heard Mr. Uxbridge say, at my elbow,

"It is not safe for you."

"Oh, Sir, it is in the programme that I ride home from the concert." And
I prepared to step in.

"I shall sit on the box, then."

"But your nieces?"

"They are walking home, squired by a younger knight."

Aunt Eliza would say, I thought, "Needs must when a lawyer drives"; and
I concluded to allow him to have his way, telling him that he was taking
a great deal of trouble. He thought it would be less if he were allowed
to sit inside; both ways were unsafe.

Nothing happened. William drove well from habit; but James was obliged
to assist him to dismount. Mr. Uxbridge waited a moment at the door,
and so there was quite a little sensation, which spread its ripples
till Aunt Eliza was reached. She sent for William, whose only excuse was
"dampness."

"Uxbridge knew my carriage, of course," she said, with a complacent
voice. "He knew me," I replied.

"You do not look like the Huells."

"I look precisely like the young woman to whom he was introduced by Mr.
Van Horn."

"Oh ho!"

"He thought it unsafe for me to come alone under William's charge."

"Ah ha!"

No more was said on the subject of his coming home with me. Aunt Eliza
had several fits of musing in the course of the evening while I read
aloud to her, which had no connection with the subject of the book. As
I put it down she said that it would be well for me to go to church the
next day. I acquiesced, but remarked that my piety would not require the
carriage, and that I preferred to walk. Besides, it would be well for
William and James to attend divine service. She could not spare James,
and thought William had better clean the harness, by way of penance.

The morning proved to be warm and sunny. I donned a muslin dress of home
manufacture and my own bonnet, and started for church. I had walked but
a few paces when the consciousness of being _free_ and _alone_ struck
me. I halted, looked about me, and concluded that I would not go to
church, but walk into the fields. I had no knowledge of the whereabouts
of the fields; but I walked straight forward, and after a while came
upon some barren fields, cropping with coarse rocks, along which ran a
narrow road. I turned into it, and soon saw beyond the rough coast the
blue ring of the ocean--vast, silent, and splendid in the sunshine.
I found a seat on the ruins of an old stone-wall, among some tangled
bushes and briers. There being no Aunt Eliza to pull through the surf,
and no animated bathers near, I discovered the beauty of the sea, and
that I loved it.

Presently I heard the steps of a horse, and, to my astonishment, Mr.
Uxbridge rode past. I was glad he did not know me. I watched him as he
rode slowly down the road, deep in thought. He let drop the bridle, and
the horse stopped, as if accustomed to the circumstance, and pawed the
ground gently, or yawed his neck for pastime. Mr. Uxbridge folded his
arms and raised his head to look seaward. It seemed to me as if he were
about to address the jury. I had dropped so entirely from my observance
of the landscape that I jumped when he resumed the bridle and turned
his horse to come back. I slipped from my seat to look among the
bushes, determined that he should not recognize me; but my attempt was a
failure--he did not ride by the second time.

"Miss Huell!" And he jumped from his saddle, slipping his arm through
the bridle.

"I am a runaway. What do you think of the Fugitive Slave Bill?"

"I approve of returning property to its owners."

"The sea must have been God's temple first, instead of the groves."

"I believe the Saurians were an Orthodox tribe."

"Did you stop yonder to ponder the sea?"

"I was pondering 'Lemorne vs. Huell.'"

He looked at me earnestly, and then gave a tug at the bridle, for his
steed was inclined to make a crude repast from the bushes.

"How was it that I did not detect you at once?" he continued.

"My apparel is Waterbury apparel."

"Ah!"

We walked up the road slowly till we came to the end of it; then I
stopped for him to understand that I thought it time for him to leave
me. He sprang into the saddle.

"Give us good-by!" he said, bringing his horse close to me.

"We are not on equal terms; I feel too humble afoot to salute you."

"Put your foot on the stirrup then."

A leaf stuck in the horse's forelock, and I pulled it off and waved it
in token of farewell. A powerful light shot into his eyes when he saw my
hand close on the leaf.

"May I come and see you?" he asked, abruptly. "I will."

"I shall say neither 'No' or 'Yes.'"

He rode on at a quick pace, and I walked homeward forgetting the sense
of liberty I had started with, and proceeded straightway to Aunt Eliza.

"I have not been to church, aunt, but to walk beyond the town; it was
not so nominated in the bond, but I went. The taste of freedom was so
pleasant that I warn you there is danger of my 'striking.' When will you
have done with Newport?"

"I am pleased with Newport now," she answered, with a curious
intonation. "I like it."

"I do also."

Her keen eyes sparkled. "Did you ever like anything when you were with
me before?"

"Never. I will tell you why I like it: because I have met, and shall
probably meet, Mr. Uxbridge. I saw him to-day. He asked permission to
visit me."

"Let him come."

"He will come."

But we did not see him either at the hotel or when we went abroad.
Aunt Eliza rode with me each afternoon, and each morning we went to
the beach. She engaged me every moment when at home, and I
faithfully performed all my tasks. I clapped to the door on
self-investigation--locked it against any analysis or reasoning upon any
circumstance connected with Mr. Uxbridge. The only piece of treachery to
my code that I was guilty of was the putting of the leaf which I brought
home on Sunday between the leaves of that poem whose motto is,

          "Mariana in the moated grange."

On Saturday morning, nearly a week after I saw him on my walk, Aunt
Eliza proposed that we should go to Turo Street on a shopping excursion;
she wanted a cap, and various articles besides. As we went into a large
shop I saw Mr. Uxbridge at a counter buying gloves; her quick eye caught
sight of him, and she edged away, saying she would look at some goods on
the other side; I might wait where I was. As he turned to go out he saw
me and stopped.

"I have been in New York since I saw you," he said. "Mr. Lemorne sent
for me."

"There is my aunt," I said.

He shrugged his shoulders.

"I shall not go away soon again," he remarked. "I missed Newport
greatly."

I made some foolish reply, and kept my eyes on Aunt Eliza, who dawdled
unaccountably. He appeared amused, and after a little talk went away.

Aunt Eliza's purchase was a rose-colored moire antique, which she said
was to be made for me; for Mrs. Bliss, one of our hotel acquaintances,
had offered to chaperon me to the great ball which would come off in a
few days, and she had accepted the offer for me.

"There will be no chance for you to take a walk instead," she finished
with.

"I can not dance, you know."

"But you will be _there_."


I was sent to a dress-maker of Mrs. Bliss's recommending; but I ordered
the dress to be made after my own design, long plain sleeves, and high
plain corsage, and requested that it should not be sent home till the
evening of the ball. Before it came off Mr. Uxbridge called, and was
graciously received by Aunt Eliza, who could be gracious to all except
her relatives. I could not but perceive, however, that they watched each
other in spite of their lively conversation. To me he was deferential,
but went over the ground of our acquaintance as if it had been the most
natural thing in the world. But for my life-long habit of never calling
in question the behavior of those I came in contact with, and of
never expecting any thing different from that I received, I might have
wondered over his visit. Every person's individuality was sacred to
me, from the fact, perhaps, that my own individuality had never been
respected by any person with whom I had any relation--not even by my own
mother.

After Mr. Uxbridge went, I asked Aunt Eliza if she thought he looked
mean and cunning? She laughed, and replied that she was bound to think
that Mr. Lemorne's lawyer could not look otherwise.

When, on the night of the ball, I presented myself in the rose-colored
moire antique for her inspection, she raised her eyebrows, but said
nothing about it.

"I need not be careful of it, I suppose, aunt?"

"Spill as much wine and ice-cream on it as you like."

In the dressing-room Mrs. Bliss surveyed me.

"I think I like this mass of rose-color," she said. "Your hair comes out
in contrast so brilliantly. Why, you have not a single ornament on!"

"It is so easy to dress without."

This was all the conversation we had together during the evening, except
when she introduced some acquaintance to fulfill her matronizing duties.
As I was no dancer I was left alone most of the time, and amused myself
by gliding from window to window along the wall, that it might not be
observed that I was a fixed flower. Still I suffered the annoyance of
being stared at by wandering squads of young gentlemen, the "curled
darlings" of the ball-room. I borrowed Mrs. Bliss's fan in one of her
visits for a protection. With that, and the embrasure of a remote window
where I finally stationed myself, I hoped to escape further notice. The
music of the celebrated band which played between the dances recalled
the chorus of spirits which charmed Faust:

   "And the fluttering
   Ribbons of drapery
   Cover the plains,
   Cover the bowers,
   Where lovers,
   Deep in thought,
   Give themselves for life."

The voice of Mrs. Bliss broke its spell.

"I bring an old friend, Miss Huell, and he tells me an acquaintance of
yours."

It was Mr. Uxbridge.

"I had no thought of meeting you, Miss Huell."

And he coolly took the seat beside me in the window, leaving to Mrs.
Bliss the alternative of standing or of going away; she chose the
latter.

"I saw you as soon as I came in," he said, "gliding from window to
window, like a vessel hugging the shore in a storm."

"With colors at half-mast; I have no dancing partner."

"How many have observed you?"

"Several young gentlemen."

"Moths."

"Oh no, butterflies."

"They must keep away now."

"Are you Rhadamanthus?"

"And Charon, too. I would have you row in the same boat with me."

"Now you are fishing."

"Won't you compliment me. Did I ever look better?"

His evening costume _was_ becoming, but he looked pale, and weary, and
disturbed. But if we were engaged for a tournament, as his behavior
indicated, I must do my best at telling. So I told him that he
never looked better, and asked him how I looked. He would look at me
presently, he said, and decide. Mrs. Bliss skimmed by us with nods and
smiles; as she vanished our eyes followed her, and we talked vaguely
on various matters, sounding ourselves and each other. When a furious
redowa set in which cut our conversation into rhythm he pushed up the
window and said, "Look out."

I turned my face to him to do so, and saw the moon at the full, riding
through the strip of sky which our vision commanded. From the moon
our eyes fell on each other. After a moment's silence, during which I
returned his steadfast gaze, for I could not help it, he said: "If we
understand the impression we make upon each other, what must be said?"

I made no reply, but fanned myself, neither looking at the moon, nor
upon the redowa, nor upon any thing.

He took the fan from me.

"Speak of yourself," he said.

"Speak you."

"I am what I seem, a man within your sphere. By all the accidents of
position and circumstance suited to it. Have you not learned it?"

"I am not what I seem. I never wore so splendid a dress as this till
tonight, and shall not again."

He gave the fan such a twirl that its slender sticks snapped, and it
dropped like the broken wing of a bird.

"Mr. Uxbridge, that fan belongs to Mrs. Bliss."

He threw it out of the window.

"You have courage, fidelity, and patience--this character with a
passionate soul. I am sure that you have such a soul?"


"I do not know."

"I have fallen in love with you. It happened on the very day when I
passed you on the way to the Glen. I never got away from the remembrance
of seeing your hand on the mane of my horse."

He waited for me to speak, but I could not; the balance of my mind was
gone. Why should this have happened to me--a slave? As it had happened,
why did I not feel exultant in the sense of power which the chance for
freedom with him should give?

"What is it, Margaret? your face is as sad as death."

"How do you call me 'Margaret?'"

"As I would call my wife--Margaret."

He rose and stood before me to screen my face from observation. I
supposed so, and endeavored to stifle my agitation.

"You are better," he said, presently. "Come go with me and get some
refreshment." And he beckoned to Mrs. Bliss, who was down the hall with
an unwieldy gentleman.

"Will you go to supper now?" she asked. "We are only waiting for you,"
Mr. Uxbridge answered, offering me his arm.

When we emerged into the blaze and glitter of the supper-room I sought
refuge in the shadow of Mrs. Bliss's companion, for it seemed to me that
I had lost my own.

"Drink this Champagne," said Mr. Uxbridge. "Pay no attention to the
Colonel on your left; he won't expect it."

"Neither must you."

"Drink."

The Champagne did not prevent me from reflecting on the fact that he had
not yet asked whether I loved him.

The spirit chorus again floated through my mind:

   "Where lovers,
   Deep in thought,
   _Give_ themselves for life."

I was not allowed to _give_ myself--I was _taken_.

"No heel-taps," he whispered, "to the bottom quaff."

"Take me home, will you?"

"Mrs. Bliss is not ready."

"Tell her that I must go."

He went behind her chair and whispered something, and she nodded to me
to go without her.

When her carriage came up, I think he gave the coachman an order to
drive home in a round-about way, for we were a long time reaching it.
I kept my face to the window, and he made no effort to divert my
attention. When we came to a street whose thick rows of trees shut out
the moonlight my eager soul longed to leap out into the dark and demand
of him his heart, soul, life, for _me_.

I struck him lightly on the shoulder; he seized my hand.

"Oh, I know you, Margaret; you are mine!"

"We are at the hotel."

He sent the carriage back, and said that he would leave me at my aunt's
door. He wished that he could see her then. Was it magic that made her
open the door before I reached it?

"Have you come on legal business?" she asked him.

"You have divined what I come for."

"Step in, step in; it's very late. I should have been in bed but for
neuralgia. Did Mr. Uxbridge come home with you, Margaret?"

"Yes, in Mrs. Bliss's carriage; I wished to come before she was ready to
leave."

"Well, Mr. Uxbridge is old enough for your protector, certainly."

"I _am_ forty, ma'am."

"Do you want Margaret?"

"I do."

"You know exactly how much is involved in your client's suit?"

"Exactly."

"You know also that his claim is an unjust one."

"Do I?"

"I shall not be poor if I lose; if I gain, Margaret will be rich."

"'Margaret will be rich,'" he repeated, absently.

"What! have you changed your mind respecting the orphans, aunt?"

"She has, and is--nothing," she went on, not heeding my remark. "Her
father married below his station; when he died his wife fell back to her
place--for he spent his fortune--and there she and Margaret must remain,
unless Lemorne is defeated."

"Aunt, for your succinct biography of my position many thanks."

"Sixty thousand dollars," she continued. "Van Horn tells me that, as
yet, the firm of Uxbridge Brothers have only an income--no capital."

"It is true," he answered, musingly.

The clock on the mantle struck two.

"A thousand dollars for every year of my life," she said. "You and I,
Uxbridge, know the value and beauty of money.

"Yes, there is beauty in money, and"--looking at me--"beauty without
it."

"The striking of the clock," I soliloquized, "proves that this scene is
not a phantasm."

"Margaret is fatigued," he said, rising. "May I come to-morrow?"


"It is my part only," replied Aunt Eliza, "to see that she is, or is
not, Cinderella."

"If you have ever thought of me, aunt, as an individual, you must have
seen that I am not averse to ashes."

He held my hand a moment, and then kissed me with a kiss of
appropriation.

"He is in love with you," she said, after he had gone. "I think I
know him. He has found beauty ignorant of itself; he will teach you to
develop it."

The next morning Mr. Uxbridge had an interview with Aunt Eliza before he
saw me.

When we were alone I asked him how her eccentricities affected him; he
could not but consider her violent, prejudiced, warped, and whimsical.
I told him that I had been taught to accept all that she did on this
basis. Would this explain to him my silence in regard to her?

"Can you endure to live with her in Bond Street for the present, or
would you rather return to Waterbury?"

"She desires my company while she is in Newport only. I have never been
with her so long before."

"I understand her. Law is a game, in her estimation, in which cheating
can as easily be carried on as at cards."

"Her soul is in this case."

"Her soul is not too large for it. Will you ride this afternoon?"

I promised, of course. From that time till he left Newport we saw each
other every day, and though I found little opportunity to express my own
peculiar feelings, he comprehended many of my wishes, and all my
tastes. I grew fond of him hourly. Had I not reason? Never was friend so
considerate, never was lover more devoted.

When he had been gone a few days, Aunt Eliza declared that she was ready
to depart from Newport. The rose-colored days were ended! In two days we
were on the Sound, coach, horses, servants, and ourselves.

It was the 1st of September when we arrived in Bond Street. A week from
that date Samuel Uxbridge, the senior partner of Uxbridge Brothers, went
to Europe with his family, and I went to Waterbury, accompanied by Mr.
Uxbridge. He consulted mother in regard to our marriage, and appointed
it in November. In October Aunt Eliza sent for me to come back to Bond
Street and spend a week. She had some fine marking to do, she wrote.
While there I noticed a restlessness in her which I had never before
observed, and conferred with Mrs. Roll on the matter. "She do be awake
nights a deal, and that's the reason," Mrs. Roll said. Her manner was
the same in other respects. She said she would not give me any thing for
my wedding outfit, but she paid my fare from Waterbury and back.

She could not spare me to go out, she told Mr. Uxbridge, and in
consequence I saw little of him while there.

In November we were married. Aunt Eliza was not at the wedding, which
was a quiet one. Mr. Uxbridge desired me to remain in Waterbury till
spring. He would not decide about taking a house in New York till then;
by that time his brother might return, and if possible we would go to
Europe for a few months. I acquiesced in all his plans. Indeed I was not
consulted; but I was happy--happy in him, and happy in every thing.

The winter passed in waiting for him to come to Waterbury every
Saturday; and in the enjoyment of the two days he passed with me. In
March Aunt Eliza wrote me that Lemorne was beaten! Van Horn had taken up
the whole contents of his snuff-box in her house the evening before in
amazement at the turn things had taken.

That night I dreamed of the scene in the hotel at Newport. I heard Aunt
Eliza saying, "If I gain, Margaret will be rich." And I heard also the
clock strike two. As it struck I said, "_My husband is a scoundrel_,"
and woke with a start.





End of Project Gutenberg's Lemorne Versus Huell, by Elizabeth Drew Stoddard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEMORNE VERSUS HUELL ***

***** This file should be named 881.txt or 881.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/8/881/

Produced by John M. Krafft

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
