The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Dawn of a To-morrow, by Frances Hodgson
Burnett, Illustrated by F. C. Yohn


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Dawn of a To-morrow

Author: Frances Hodgson Burnett

Release Date: March, 1996  [eBook #460]
Most recently updated: February 5, 2005

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DAWN OF A TO-MORROW***


E-text prepared by Charles Keller with OmniPage Professional OCR software
donated by Caere Corporation



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 460-h.htm or 460-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/6/460/460-h/460-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/6/460/460-h.zip)





THE DAWN OF A TO-MORROW

by

FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT







I

There are always two ways of looking at a thing, frequently there are
six or seven; but two ways of looking at a London fog are quite enough.
When it is thick and yellow in the streets and stings a man's throat and
lungs as he breathes it, an awakening in the early morning is either an
unearthly and grewsome, or a mysteriously enclosing, secluding, and
comfortable thing.  If one awakens in a healthy body, and with a clear
brain rested by normal sleep and retaining memories of a normally
agreeable yesterday, one may lie watching the housemaid building the
fire; and after she has swept the hearth and put things in order, lie
watching the flames of the blazing and crackling wood catch the coals
and set them blazing also, and dancing merrily and filling corners with
a glow; and in so lying and realizing that leaping light and warmth and
a soft bed are good things, one may turn over on one's back, stretching
arms and legs luxuriously, drawing deep breaths and smiling at a
knowledge of the fog outside which makes half-past eight o'clock on a
December morning as dark as twelve o'clock on a December night.  Under
such conditions the soft, thick, yellow gloom has its picturesque and
even humorous aspect. One feels enclosed by it at once fantastically
and cosily, and is inclined to revel in imaginings of the picture
outside, its Rembrandt lights and orange yellows, the halos about the
street-lamps, the illumination of shop-windows, the flare of torches
stuck up over coster barrows and coffee-stands, the shadows on the faces
of the men and women selling and buying beside them.  Refreshed by sleep
and comfort and surrounded by light, warmth, and good cheer, it is easy
to face the day, to confront going out into the fog and feeling a sort
of pleasure in its mysteries.  This is one way of looking at it, but
only one.

The other way is marked by enormous differences.

A man--he had given his name to the people of the house as Antony Dart--
awakened in a third-story bedroom in a lodging-house in a poor street in
London, and as his consciousness returned to him, its slow and reluctant
movings confronted the second point of view--marked by enormous
differences.  He had not slept two consecutive hours through the night,
and when he had slept he had been tormented by dreary dreams, which were
more full of misery because of their elusive vagueness, which kept his
tortured brain on a wearying strain of effort to reach some definite
understanding of them.  Yet when he awakened the consciousness of being
again alive was an awful thing. If the dreams could have faded into
blankness and all have passed with the passing of the night, how he
could have thanked whatever gods there be!  Only not to awake--only not
to awake!  But he had awakened.

The clock struck nine as he did so, consequently he knew the hour. The
lodging-house slavey had aroused him by coming to light the fire.  She
had set her candle on the hearth and done her work as stealthily as
possible, but he had been disturbed, though he had made a desperate
effort to struggle back into sleep.  That was no use--no use.  He was
awake and he was in the midst of it all again. Without the sense of
luxurious comfort he opened his eyes and turned upon his back, throwing
out his arms flatly, so that he lay as in the form of a cross, in heavy
weariness and anguish.  For months he had awakened each morning after
such a night and had so lain like a crucified thing.

As he watched the painful flickering of the damp and smoking wood and
coal he remembered this and thought that there had been a lifetime of
such awakenings, not knowing that the morbidness of a fagged brain
blotted out the memory of more normal days and told him fantastic lies
which were but a hundredth part truth.  He could see only the hundredth
part truth, and it assumed proportions so huge that he could see nothing
else.  In such a state the human brain is an infernal machine and its
workings can only be conquered if the mortal thing which lives with it--
day and night, night and day--has learned to separate its controllable
from its seemingly uncontrollable atoms, and can silence its clamor on
its way to madness.

Antony Dart had not learned this thing and the clamor had had its
hideous way with him.  Physicians would have given a name to his mental
and physical condition.  He had heard these names often--applied to men
the strain of whose lives had been like the strain of his own, and had
left them as it had left him--jaded, joyless, breaking things.  Some of
them had been broken and had died or were dragging out bruised and
tormented days in their own homes or in mad-houses.  He always shuddered
when he heard their names, and rebelled with sick fear against the mere
mention of them.  They had worked as he had worked, they had been
stricken with the delirium of accumulation--accumulation--as he had
been.  They had been caught in the rush and swirl of the great
maelstrom, and had been borne round and round in it, until having
grasped every coveted thing tossing upon its circling waters, they
themselves had been flung upon the shore with both hands full, the rocks
about them strewn with rich possessions, while they lay prostrate and
gazed at all life had brought with dull, hopeless, anguished eyes.  He
knew--if the worst came to the worst--what would be said of him,
because he had heard it said of others.  "He worked too hard--he worked
too hard."  He was sick of hearing it. What was wrong with the world--
what was wrong with man, as Man--if work could break him like this? If
one believed in Deity, the living creature It breathed into being must
be a perfect thing--not one to be wearied, sickened, tortured by the
life Its breathing had created.  A mere man would disdain to build a
thing so poor and incomplete. A mere human engineer who constructed an
engine whose workings were perpetually at fault--which went wrong when
called upon to do the labor it was made for--who would not scoff at it
and cast it aside as a piece of worthless bungling?

"Something is wrong," he muttered, lying flat upon his cross and staring
at the yellow haze which had crept through crannies in window-sashes
into the room.  "Someone is wrong.  Is it I--or You?"

His thin lips drew themselves back against his teeth in a mirthless
smile which was like a grin.

"Yes," he said.  "I am pretty far gone.  I am beginning to talk to
myself about God.  Bryan did it just before he was taken to Dr.
Hewletts' place and cut his throat."

He had not led a specially evil life; he had not broken laws, but the
subject of Deity was not one which his scheme of existence had included.
When it had haunted him of late he had felt it an untoward and morbid
sign.  The thing had drawn him--drawn him; he had complained against it,
he had argued, sometimes he knew--shuddering--that he had raved.
Something had seemed to stand aside and watch his being and his
thinking. Something which filled the universe had seemed to wait, and to
have waited through all the eternal ages, to see what he--one man--would
do.  At times a great appalled wonder had swept over him at his
realization that he had never known or thought of it before.  It had
been there always--through all the ages that had passed.  And
sometimes--once or twice--the thought had in some unspeakable,
untranslatable way brought him a moment's calm.

But at other times he had said to himself--with a shivering soul
cowering within him--that this was only part of it all and was a
beginning, perhaps, of religious monomania.

During the last week he had known what he was going to do--he had made
up his mind.  This abject horror through which others had let themselves
be dragged to madness or death he would not endure.  The end should come
quickly, and no one should be smitten aghast by seeing or knowing
how it came. In the crowded shabbier streets of London there were
lodging-houses where one, by taking precautions, could end his life in
such a manner as would blot him out of any world where such a man as
himself had been known.  A pistol, properly managed, would obliterate
resemblance to any human thing.  Months ago through chance talk he had
heard how it could be done--and done quickly. He could leave a
misleading letter. He had planned what it should be--the story it should
tell of a disheartened mediocre venturer of his poor all returning
bankrupt and humiliated from Australia, ending existence in such
pennilessness that the parish must give him a pauper's grave.  What did
it matter where a man lay, so that he slept--slept--slept?  Surely with
one's brains scattered one would sleep soundly anywhere.

He had come to the house the night before, dressed shabbily with the
pitiable respectability of a defeated man.  He had entered droopingly
with bent shoulders and hopeless hang of head.  In his own sphere he was
a man who held himself well.  He had let fall a few dispirited sentences
when he had engaged his back room from the woman of the house, and she
had recognized him as one of the luckless. In fact, she had hesitated a
moment before his unreliable look until he had taken out money from his
pocket and paid his rent for a week in advance.  She would have that at
least for her trouble, he had said to himself.  He should not occupy the
room after to-morrow.  In his own home some days would pass before his
household began to make inquiries.  He had told his servants that he was
going over to Paris for a change.  He would be safe and deep in his
pauper's grave a week before they asked each other why they did not hear
from him.  All was in order.  One of the mocking agonies was that living
was done for.  He had ceased to live.  Work, pleasure, sun, moon, and
stars had lost their meaning.  He stood and looked at the most radiant
loveliness of land and sky and sea and felt nothing. Success brought
greater wealth each day without stirring a pulse of pleasure, even in
triumph.  There was nothing left but the awful days and awful nights to
which he knew physicians could give their scientific name, but had
no healing for.  He had gone far enough.  He would go no farther.
To-morrow it would have been over long hours.  And there would have been
no public declaiming over the humiliating pitifulness of his end.  And
what did it matter?

How thick the fog was outside--thick enough for a man to lose himself
in it.  The yellow mist which had crept in under the doors and through
the crevices of the window-sashes gave a ghostly look to the room--a
ghastly, abnormal look, he said to himself.  The fire was smouldering
instead of blazing.  But what did it matter?  He was going out.  He had
not bought the pistol last night--like a fool.  Somehow his brain had
been so tired and crowded that he had forgotten.

"Forgotten."  He mentally repeated the word as he got out of bed. By
this time to-morrow he should have forgotten everything.  THIS TIME
TO-MORROW.  His mind repeated that also, as he began to dress himself.
Where should he be?  Should he be anywhere?  Suppose he awakened again--
to something as bad as this?  How did a man get out of his body?  After
the crash and shock what happened?  Did one find oneself standing beside
the Thing and looking down at it?  It would not be a good thing to stand
and look down on--even for that which had deserted it.  But having torn
oneself loose from it and its devilish aches and pains, one would not
care--one would see how little it all mattered.  Anything else must be
better than this--the thing for which there was a scientific name but no
healing.  He had taken all the drugs, he had obeyed all the medical
orders, and here he was after that last hell of a night--dressing
himself in a back bedroom of a cheap lodging-house to go out and buy a
pistol in this damned fog.

He laughed at the last phrase of his thought, the laugh which was a
mirthless grin.

"I am thinking of it as if I was afraid of taking cold," he said. "And
to-morrow--!"

There would be no To-morrow. To-morrows were at an end.  No more
nights--no more days--no more morrows.

He finished dressing, putting on his discriminatingly chosen
shabby-genteel clothes with a care for the effect he intended them to
produce. The collar and cuffs of his shirt were frayed and yellow, and
he fastened his collar with a pin and tied his worn necktie carelessly.
His overcoat was beginning to wear a greenish shade and look threadbare,
so was his hat. When his toilet was complete he looked at himself in the
cracked and hazy glass, bending forward to scrutinize his unshaven face
under the shadow of the dingy hat.

"It is all right," he muttered. "It is not far to the pawnshop where I
saw it."

The stillness of the room as he turned to go out was uncanny.  As it was
a back room, there was no street below from which could arise sounds of
passing vehicles, and the thickness of the fog muffled such sound as
might have floated from the front.  He stopped half-way to the door, not
knowing why, and listened. To what--for what?  The silence seemed to
spread through all the house--out into the streets--through all
London--through all the world, and he to stand in the midst of it, a man
on the way to Death--with no To-morrow.

What did it mean?  It seemed to mean something.  The world withdrawn--
life withdrawn--sound withdrawn--breath withdrawn.  He stood and waited.
Perhaps this was one of the symptoms of the morbid thing for which there
was that name.  If so he had better get away quickly and have it over,
lest he be found wandering about not knowing--not knowing.  But now he
knew--the Silence.  He waited--waited and tried to hear, as if
something was calling him--calling without sound.  It returned to him--
the thought of That which had waited through all the ages to see what
he--one man--would do. He had never exactly pitied himself before--he
did not know that he pitied himself now, but he was a man going to his
death, and a light, cold sweat broke out on him and it seemed as if it
was not he who did it, but some other--he flung out his arms and cried
aloud words he had not known he was going to speak.

"Lord!  Lord!  What shall I do to be saved?"

But the Silence gave no answer. It was the Silence still.

And after standing a few moments panting, his arms fell and his head
dropped, and turning the handle of the door, he went out to buy the
pistol.

II

As he went down the narrow staircase, covered with its dingy and
threadbare carpet, he found the house so full of dirty yellow haze that
he realized that the fog must be of the extraordinary ones which are
remembered in after-years as abnormal specimens of their kind.  He
recalled that there had been one of the sort three years before, and
that traffic and business had been almost entirely stopped by it, that
accidents had happened in the streets, and that people having lost their
way had wandered about turning corners until they found themselves far
from their intended destinations and obliged to take refuge in hotels or
the houses of hospitable strangers.  Curious incidents had occurred and
odd stories were told by those who had felt themselves obliged by
circumstances to go out into the baffling gloom. He guessed that
something of a like nature had fallen upon the town again.  The
gas-light on the landings and in the melancholy hall burned feebly--so
feebly that one got but a vague view of the rickety hat-stand and the
shabby overcoats and head-gear hanging upon it.  It was well for him
that he had but a corner or so to turn before he reached the pawnshop in
whose window he had seen the pistol he intended to buy.

When he opened the street-door he saw that the fog was, upon the whole,
perhaps even heavier and more obscuring, if possible, than the one so
well remembered.  He could not see anything three feet before him, he
could not see with distinctness anything two feet ahead.  The sensation
of stepping forward was uncertain and mysterious enough to be almost
appalling.  A man not sufficiently cautious might have fallen into any
open hole in his path.  Antony Dart kept as closely as possible to the
sides of the houses.  It would have been easy to walk off the pavement
into the middle of the street but for the edges of the curb and the step
downward from its level.  Traffic had almost absolutely ceased, though
in the more important streets link-boys were making efforts to guide
men or four-wheelers slowly along. The blind feeling of the thing was
rather awful.  Though but few pedestrians were out, Dart found himself
once or twice brushing against or coming into forcible contact with men
feeling their way about like himself.

"One turn to the right," he repeated mentally, "two to the left, and the
place is at the corner of the other side of the street."

He managed to reach it at last, but it had been a slow, and therefore,
long journey.  All the gas-jets the little shop owned were lighted, but
even under their flare the articles in the window--the one or two once
cheaply gaudy dresses and shawls and men's garments--hung in the haze
like the dreary, dangling ghosts of things recently executed. Among
watches and forlorn pieces of old-fashioned jewelry and odds and ends,
the pistol lay against the folds of a dirty gauze shawl.  There it was.
It would have been annoying if someone else had been beforehand and had
bought it.

Inside the shop more dangling spectres hung and the place was almost
dark.  It was a shabby pawnshop, and the man lounging behind the counter
was a shabby man with an unshaven, unamiable face.

"I want to look at that pistol in the right-hand corner of your window,"
Antony Dart said.

The pawnbroker uttered a sound something between a half-laugh and a
grunt.  He took the weapon from the window.

Antony Dart examined it critically. He must make quite sure of it.  He
made no further remark. He felt he had done with speech.

Being told the price asked for the purchase, he drew out his purse and
took the money from it.  After making the payment he noted that he still
possessed a five-pound note and some sovereigns.  There passed through
his mind a wonder as to who would spend it.  The most decent thing,
perhaps, would be to give it away.  If it was in his room--to-morrow--
the parish would not bury him, and it would be safer that the parish
should.

He was thinking of this as he left the shop and began to cross the
street.  Because his mind was wandering he was less watchful.  Suddenly
a rubber-tired hansom, moving without sound, appeared immediately in his
path--the horse's head loomed up above his own.  He made the inevitable
involuntary whirl aside to move out of the way, the hansom passed, and
turning again, he went on.  His movement had been too swift to allow of
his realizing the direction in which his turn had been made.  He was
wholly unaware that when he crossed the street he crossed backward
instead of forward.  He turned a corner literally feeling his way, went
on, turned another, and after walking the length of the street, suddenly
understood that he was in a strange place and had lost his bearings.

This was exactly what had happened to people on the day of the memorable
fog of three years before. He had heard them talking of such
experiences, and of the curious and baffling sensations they gave rise
to in the brain.  Now he understood them.  He could not be far from his
lodgings, but he felt like a man who was blind, and who had been turned
out of the path he knew. He had not the resource of the people whose
stories he had heard.  He would not stop and address anyone. There could
be no certainty as to whom he might find himself speaking to.  He would
speak to no one. He would wander about until he came upon some clew.
Even if he came upon none, the fog would surely lift a little and become
a trifle less dense in course of time.  He drew up the collar of his
overcoat, pulled his hat down over his eyes and went on--his hand on the
thing he had thrust into a pocket.

He did not find his clew as he had hoped, and instead of lifting the fog
grew heavier.  He found himself at last no longer striving for any end,
but rambling along mechanically, feeling like a man in a dream--a
nightmare.  Once he recognized a weird suggestion in the mystery about
him.  To-morrow might one be wandering about aimlessly in some such
haze.  He hoped not.

His lodgings were not far from the Embankment, and he knew at last that
he was wandering along it, and had reached one of the bridges. His mood
led him to turn in upon it, and when he reached an embrasure to stop
near it and lean upon the parapet looking down.  He could not see the
water, the fog was too dense, but he could hear some faint splashing
against stones.  He had taken no food and was rather faint. What a
strange thing it was to feel faint for want of food--to stand alone, cut
off from every other human being--everything done for. No wonder that
sometimes, particularly on such days as these, there were plunges made
from the parapet--no wonder.  He leaned farther over and strained his
eyes to see some gleam of water through the yellowness.  But it was not
to be done.  He was thinking the inevitable thing, of course; but such a
plunge would not do for him.  The other thing would destroy all traces.

As he drew back he heard something fall with the solid tinkling sound of
coin on the flag pavement. When he had been in the pawnbroker's shop he
had taken the gold from his purse and thrust it carelessly into his
waistcoat pocket, thinking that it would be easy to reach when he chose
to give it to one beggar or another, if he should see some wretch who
would be the better for it.  Some movement he had made in bending had
caused a sovereign to slip out and it had fallen upon the stones.

He did not intend to pick it up, but in the moment in which he stood
looking down at it he heard close to him a shuffling movement. What he
had thought a bundle of rags or rubbish covered with sacking--some
tramp's deserted or forgotten belongings--was stirring.  It was alive,
and as he bent to look at it the sacking divided itself, and a small
head, covered with a shock of brilliant red hair, thrust itself out, a
shrewd, small face turning to look up at him slyly with deep-set black
eyes.

It was a human girl creature about twelve years old.

"Are yer goin' to do it?" she said in a hoarse, street-strained voice.
"Yer would be a fool if yer did--with as much as that on yer."

She pointed with a reddened, chapped, and dirty hand at the sovereign.

"Pick it up," he said.  "You may have it."

Her wild shuffle forward was an actual leap.  The hand made a snatching
clutch at the coin.  She was evidently afraid that he was either not in
earnest or would repent.  The next second she was on her feet and ready
for flight.

"Stop," he said; "I've got more to give away."

She hesitated--not believing him, yet feeling it madness to lose a
chance.

"MORE!" she gasped.  Then she drew nearer to him, and a singular change
came upon her face.  It was a change which made her look oddly human.

"Gawd, mister!" she said.  "Yer can give away a quid like it was
nothin'--an' yer've got more--an' yer goin' to do THAT--jes cos yer 'ad
a bit too much lars night an' there's a fog this mornin'!  You take it
straight from me--don't yer do it. I give yer that tip for the suvrink."

She was, for her years, so ugly and so ancient, and hardened in voice
and skin and manner that she fascinated him.  Not that a man who has no
To-morrow in view is likely to be particularly conscious of mental
processes.  He was done for, but he stood and stared at her.  What part
of the Power moving the scheme of the universe stood near and thrust him
on in the path designed he did not know then--perhaps never did.  He was
still holding on to the thing in his pocket, but he spoke to her again.

"What do you mean?" he asked glumly.

She sidled nearer, her sharp eyes on his face.

"I bin watchin' yer," she said. "I sat down and pulled the sack over me
'ead to breathe inside it an' get a bit warm.  An' I see yer come. I
knowed wot yer was after, I did. I watched yer through a 'ole in me
sack.  I wasn't goin' to call a copper. I shouldn't want ter be stopped
meself if I made up me mind.  I seed a gal dragged out las' week an'
it'd a broke yer 'art to see 'er tear 'er clothes an' scream.  Wot
business 'ad they preventin' 'er goin' off quiet?  I wouldn't 'a'
stopped yer--but w'en the quid fell, that made it different."

"I--" he said, feeling the foolishness of the statement, but making it,
nevertheless, "I am ill."

"Course yer ill.  It's yer 'ead. Come along er me an' get a cup er
cawfee at a stand, an' buck up.  If yer've give me that quid straight--
wish-yer-may-die--I'll go with yer an' get a cup myself.  I ain't 'ad a
bite since yesterday--an' 't wa'n't nothin' but a slice o' polony
sossidge I found on a dust-'eap.  Come on, mister."

She pulled his coat with her cracked hand.  He glanced down at it
mechanically, and saw that some of the fissures had bled and the
roughened surface was smeared with the blood.  They stood together in
the small space in which the fog enclosed them--he and she--the man with
no To-morrow and the girl thing who seemed as old as himself, with her
sharp, small nose and chin, her sharp eyes and voice--and yet--perhaps
the fogs enclosing did it--something drew them together in an uncanny
way. Something made him forget the lost clew to the lodging-house--
something made him turn and go with her--a thing led in the dark.

"How can you find your way?" he said.  "I lost mine."

"There ain't no fog can lose me," she answered, shuffling along by his
side; "'sides, it's goin' to lift. Look at that man comin' to'ards us."

It was true that they could see through the orange-colored mist the
approaching figure of a man who was at a yard's distance from them. Yes,
it was lifting slightly--at least enough to allow of one's making a
guess at the direction in which one moved.

"Where are you going?" he asked.

"Apple Blossom Court," she answered.  "The cawfee-stand's in a street
near it--and there's a shop where I can buy things."

"Apple Blossom Court!" he ejaculated.  "What a name!"

"There ain't no apple-blossoms there," chuckling; "nor no smell of 'em.
'T ain't as nice as its nime is--Apple Blossom Court ain't."

"What do you want to buy?  A pair of shoes?"  The shoes her naked feet
were thrust into were leprous-looking things through which nearly all
her toes protruded.  But she chuckled when he spoke.

"No, I 'm goin' to buy a di'mond tirarer to go to the opery in," she
said, dragging her old sack closer round her neck.  "I ain't ad a noo un
since I went to the last Drorin'-room."

It was impudent street chaff, but there was cheerful spirit in it, and
cheerful spirit has some occult effect upon morbidity.  Antony Dart did
not smile, but he felt a faint stirring of curiosity, which was, after
all, not a bad thing for a man who had not felt an interest for a year.

"What is it you are going to buy?"

"I'm goin' to fill me stummick fust," with a grin of elation.  "Three
thick slices o' bread an' drippin' an' a mug o' cawfee.  An' then I'm
goin' to get sumethin' 'earty to carry to Polly.  She ain't no good,
pore thing!"

"Who is she?"

Stopping a moment to drag up the heel of her dreadful shoe, she answered
him with an unprejudiced directness which might have been appalling if
he had been in the mood to be appalled.

"Ain't eighteen, an' tryin' to earn 'er livin' on the street.  She ain't
made for it.  Little country thing, allus frightened to death an' ready
to bust out cryin'.  Gents ain't goin' to stand that.  A lot of 'em
wants cheerin' up as much as she does. Gent as was in liquor last night
knocked 'er down an' give 'er a black eye.  'T wan't ill feelin', but he
lost his temper, an' give 'er a knock casual.  She can't go out
to-night, an' she's been 'uddled up all day cryin' for 'er mother."

"Where is her mother?"

"In the country--on a farm. Polly took a place in a lodgin'-'ouse an'
got in trouble.  The biby was dead, an' when she come out o' Queen
Charlotte's she was took in by a woman an' kep'.  She kicked 'er out in
a week 'cos of her cryin'. The life didn't suit 'er.  I found 'er cryin'
fit to split 'er chist one night--corner o' Apple Blossom Court--an' I
took care of 'er."

"Where?"

"Me chambers," grinning; "top loft of a 'ouse in the court.  If anyone
else 'd 'ave it I should be turned out.  It's an 'ole, I can tell yer--
but it's better than sleepin' under the bridges."

"Take me to see it," said Antony Dart.  "I want to see the girl."

The words spoke themselves.  Why should he care to see either cockloft
or girl?  He did not.  He wanted to go back to his lodgings with that
which he had come out to buy. Yet he said this thing.  His companion
looked up at him with an expression actually relieved.

"Would yer tike up with 'er?" with eager sharpness, as if confronting a
simple business proposition. "She's pretty an' clean, an' she won't
drink a drop o' nothin'.  If she was treated kind she'd be cheerfler.
She's got a round fice an' light 'air an' eyes.  'Er 'air's curly.
P'raps yer'd like 'er."

"Take me to see her."

"She'd look better to-morrow," cautiously, "when the swellin's gone
down round 'er eye."

Dart started--and it was because he had for the last five minutes
forgotten something.

"I shall not be here to-morrow," he said.  His grasp upon the thing in
his pocket had loosened, and he tightened it.

"I have some more money in my purse," he said deliberately.  "I meant to
give it away before going. I want to give it to people who need it very
much."

She gave him one of the sly, squinting glances.

"Deservin' cases?"  She put it to him in brazen mockery.

"I don't care," he answered slowly and heavily.  "I don't care a damn."

Her face changed exactly as he had seen it change on the bridge when she
had drawn nearer to him. Its ugly hardness suddenly looked human.  And
that she could look human was fantastic.

"'Ow much 'ave yer?" she asked. "'Ow much is it?"

"About ten pounds."

She stopped and stared at him with open mouth.

"Gawd!" she broke out; "ten pounds 'd send Apple Blossom Court to
'eving.  Leastways, it'd take some of it out o' 'ell."

"Take me to it," he said roughly. "Take me."

She began to walk quickly, breathing fast.  The fog was lighter, and it
was no longer a blinding thing.

A question occurred to Dart.

"Why don't you ask me to give the money to you?" he said bluntly.

"Dunno," she answered as bluntly. But after taking a few steps farther
she spoke again.

"I 'm cheerfler than most of 'em," she elaborated.  "If yer born
cheerfle yer can stand things.  When I gets a job nussin' women's bibies
they don't cry when I 'andles 'em. I gets many a bite an' a copper 'cos
o' that.  Folks likes yer.  I shall get on better than Polly when I'm
old enough to go on the street."

The organ of whose lagging, sick pumpings Antony Dart had scarcely been
aware for months gave a sudden leap in his breast.  His blood actually
hastened its pace, and ran through his veins instead of crawling--a
distinct physical effect of an actual mental condition.  It was produced
upon him by the mere matter-of-fact ordinariness of her tone.  He had
never been a sentimental man, and had long ceased to be a feeling one,
but at that moment something emotional and normal happened to him.

"You expect to live in that way?" he said.

"Ain't nothin' else fer me to do. Wisht I was better lookin'.  But I've
got a lot of 'air," clawing her mop, "an' it's red.  One day,"
chuckling, "a gent ses to me--he ses:  'Oh! yer'll do.  Yer an ugly
little devil--but ye ARE a devil.'"

She was leading him through a narrow, filthy back street, and she
stopped, grinning up in his face.

"I say, mister," she wheedled, "let's stop at the cawfee-stand. It's up
this way."

When he acceded and followed her, she quickly turned a corner. They were
in another lane thick with fog, which flared with the flame of torches
stuck in costers' barrows which stood here and there--barrows with
fried fish upon them, barrows with second-hand-looking vegetables and
others piled with more than second-hand-looking garments. Trade was not
driving, but near one or two of them dirty, ill-used looking women, a
man or so, and a few children stood.  At a corner which led into a black
hole of a court, a coffee-stand was stationed, in charge of a burly
ruffian in corduroys.

"Come along," said the girl. "There it is.  It ain't strong, but it's
'ot."

She sidled up to the stand, drawing Dart with her, as if glad of his
protection.

"'Ello, Barney," she said.  "'Ere's a gent warnts a mug o' yer best.
I've 'ad a bit o' luck, an' I wants one mesself."

"Garn," growled Barney.  "You an' yer luck!  Gent may want a mug, but
y'd show yer money fust."

"Strewth!  I've got it.  Y' aint got the chinge fer wot I 'ave in me
'and 'ere.  'As 'e, mister?"

"Show it," taunted the man, and then turning to Dart.  "Yer wants a mug
o' cawfee?"

"Yes."

The girl held out her hand cautiously--the piece of gold lying upon its
palm.

"Look 'ere," she said.

There were two or three men slouching about the stand.  Suddenly a hand
darted from between two of them who stood nearest, the sovereign was
snatched, a screamed oath from the girl rent the thick air, and a
forlorn enough scarecrow of a young fellow sprang away.

The blood leaped in Antony Dart's veins again and he sprang after him in
a wholly normal passion of indignation.  A thousand years ago--as it
seemed to him--he had been a good runner.  This man was not one, and
want of food had weakened him. Dart went after him with strides which
astonished himself.  Up the street, into an alley and out of it, a dozen
yards more and into a court, and the man wheeled with a hoarse, baffled
curse.  The place had no outlet.

"Hell!" was all the creature said.

Dart took him by his greasy collar. Even the brief rush had left him
feeling like a living thing--which was a new sensation.

"Give it up," he ordered.

The thief looked at him with a half-laugh and obeyed, as if he felt the
uselessness of a struggle.  He was not more than twenty-five years old,
and his eyes were cavernous with want.  He had the face of a man who
might have belonged to a better class.  When he had uttered the
exclamation invoking the infernal regions he had not dropped the
aspirate.

"I 'm as hungry as she is," he raved.

"Hungry enough to rob a child beggar?" said Dart.

"Hungry enough to rob a starving old woman--or a baby," with a defiant
snort.  "Wolf hungry--tiger hungry--hungry enough to cut throats."

He whirled himself loose and leaned his body against the wall, turning
his face toward it.  Suddenly he made a choking sound and began to sob.

"Hell!" he choked.  "I'll give it up!  I'll give it up!"

What a figure--what a figure, as he swung against the blackened wall,
his scarecrow clothes hanging on him, their once decent material making
their pinning together of buttonless places, their looseness and rents
showing dirty linen, more abject than any other squalor could have made
them. Antony Dart's blood, still running warm and well, was doing its
normal work among the brain-cells which had stirred so evilly through
the night. When he had seized the fellow by the collar, his hand had
left his pocket.  He thrust it into another pocket and drew out some
silver.

"Go and get yourself some food," he said.  "As much as you can eat. Then
go and wait for me at the place they call Apple Blossom Court.  I don't
know where it is, but I am going there.  I want to hear how you came to
this.  Will you come?"

The thief lurched away from the wall and toward him.  He stared up into
his eyes through the fog.  The tears had smeared his cheekbones.

"God!" he said.  "Will I come? Look and see if I'll come."  Dart looked.

"Yes, you'll come," he answered, and he gave him the money.  "I 'm
going back to the coffee-stand."

The thief stood staring after him as he went out of the court.  Dart was
speaking to himself.

"I don't know why I did it," he said.  "But the thing had to be done."

In the street he turned into he came upon the robbed girl, running,
panting, and crying.  She uttered a shout and flung herself upon him,
clutching his coat.

"Gawd!" she sobbed hysterically, "I thort I'd lost yer!  I thort I'd
lost all of it, I did!  Strewth!  I 'm glad I've found yer--" and she
stopped, choking with her sobs and sniffs, rubbing her face in her sack.

"Here is your sovereign," Dart said, handing it to her.

She dropped the corner of the sack and looked up with a queer laugh.

"Did yer find a copper?  Did yer give him in charge?"

"No," answered Dart.  "He was worse off than you.  He was starving. I
took this from him; but I gave him some money and told him to meet us at
Apple Blossom Court."

She stopped short and drew back a pace to stare up at him.

"Well," she gave forth, "y' ARE a queer one!"

And yet in the amazement on her face he perceived a remote dawning of an
understanding of the meaning of the thing he had done.

He had spoken like a man in a dream.  He felt like a man in a dream,
being led in the thick mist from place to place.  He was led back to the
coffee-stand, where now Barney, the proprietor, was pouring out coffee
for a hoarse-voiced coster girl with a draggled feather in her hat, who
greeted their arrival hilariously.

"Hello, Glad!" she cried out. "Got yer suvrink back?"

Glad--it seemed to be the creature's wild name--nodded, but held close
to her companion's side, clutching his coat.

"Let's go in there an' change it," she said, nodding toward a small pork
and ham shop near by.  "An' then yer can take care of it for me."

"What did she call you?"  Antony Dart asked her as they went.

"Glad.  Don't know as I ever 'ad a nime o' me own, but a little cove as
went once to the pantermine told me about a young lady as was Fairy
Queen an' 'er name was Gladys Beverly St. John, so I called mesself
that. No one never said it all at onct--they don't never say nothin'
but Glad.  I'm glad enough this mornin'," chuckling again, "'avin' the
luck to come up with you, mister. Never had luck like it 'afore."

They went into the pork and ham shop and changed the sovereign. There
was cooked food in the windows--roast pork and boiled ham and corned
beef.  She bought slices of pork and beef, and of suet-pudding with a
few currants sprinkled through it.

"Will yer 'elp me to carry it?" she inquired.  "I'll 'ave to get a few
pen'worth o' coal an' wood an' a screw o' tea an' sugar.  My wig, wot a
feed me an' Polly'll 'ave!"

As they returned to the coffee-stand she broke more than once into a
hop of glee.  Barney had changed his mind concerning her.  A solid
sovereign which must be changed and a companion whose shabby gentility
was absolute grandeur when compared with his present surroundings made a
difference.

She received her mug of coffee and thick slice of bread and dripping
with a grin, and swallowed the hot sweet liquid down in ecstatic gulps.

"Ain't I in luck?" she said, handing her mug back when it was empty.
"Gi' me another, Barney."

Antony Dart drank coffee also and ate bread and dripping.  The coffee
was hot and the bread and dripping, dashed with salt, quite eatable.  He
had needed food and felt the better for it.

"Come on, mister," said Glad, when their meal was ended.  "I want to get
back to Polly, an' there's coal and bread and things to buy."

She hurried him along, breaking her pace with hops at intervals.  She
darted into dirty shops and brought out things screwed up in paper.  She
went last into a cellar and returned carrying a small sack of coal over
her shoulders.

"Bought sack an' all," she said elatedly.  "A sack's a good thing to
'ave."

"Let me carry it for you," said Antony Dart

"Spile yer coat," with her sidelong upward glance.

"I don't care," he answered.  "I don't care a damn."

The final expletive was totally unnecessary, but it meant a thing he did
not say.  Whatsoever was thrusting him this way and that, speaking
through his speech, leading him to do things he had not dreamed of
doing, should have its will with him. He had been fastened to the skirts
of this beggar imp and he would go on to the end and do what was to be
done this day.  It was part of the dream.

The sack of coal was over his shoulder when they turned into Apple
Blossom Court.  It would have been a black hole on a sunny day, and now
it was like Hades, lit grimly by a gas-jet or two, small and flickering,
with the orange haze about them.  Filthy flagging, murky doorways,
broken steps and broken windows stuffed with rags, and the smell of the
sewers let loose had Apple Blossom Court.

Glad, with the wealth of the pork and ham shop and other riches in her
arms, entered a repellent doorway in a spirit of great good cheer and
Dart followed her.  Past a room where a drunken woman lay sleeping with
her head on a table, a child pulling at her dress and crying, up a
stairway with broken balusters and breaking steps, through a landing,
upstairs again, and up still farther until they reached the top.  Glad
stopped before a door and shook the handle, crying out:

"'S only me, Polly.  You can open it."  She added to Dart in an
undertone:  "She 'as to keep it locked. No knowin' who'd want to get in.
Polly," shaking the door-handle again, "Polly's only me."

The door opened slowly.  On the other side of it stood a girl with a
dimpled round face which was quite pale; under one of her childishly
vacant blue eyes was a discoloration, and her curly fair hair was tucked
up on the top of her head in a knot. As she took in the fact of Antony
Dart's presence her chin began to quiver.

"I ain't fit to--to see no one," she stammered pitifully.  "Why did you,
Glad--why did you?"

"Ain't no 'arm in 'IM," said Glad. "'E's one o' the friendly ones.  'E
give me a suvrink.  Look wot I've got," hopping about as she showed her
parcels.

"You need not be afraid of me," Antony Dart said.  He paused a second,
staring at her, and suddenly added, "Poor little wretch!"

Her look was so scared and uncertain a thing that he walked away from
her and threw the sack of coal on the hearth.  A small grate with broken
bars hung loosely in the fireplace, a battered tin kettle tilted
drunkenly near it.  A mattress, from the holes in whose ticking straw
bulged, lay on the floor in a corner, with some old sacks thrown over
it. Glad had, without doubt, borrowed her shoulder covering from the
collection.  The garret was as cold as the grave, and almost as dark;
the fog hung in it thickly.  There were crevices enough through which it
could penetrate.

Antony Dart knelt down on the hearth and drew matches from his pocket.

"We ought to have brought some paper," he said.

Glad ran forward.

"Wot a gent ye are!" she cried. "Y' ain't never goin' to light it?"

"Yes."

She ran back to the rickety table and collected the scraps of paper
which had held her purchases. They were small, but useful.

"That wot was round the sausage an' the puddin's greasy," she exulted.

Polly hung over the table and trembled at the sight of meat and bread.
Plainly, she did not understand what was happening.  The greased paper
set light to the wood, and the wood to the coal.  All three flared and
blazed with a sound of cheerful crackling.  The blaze threw out its glow
as finely as if it had been set alight to warm a better place. The
wonder of a fire is like the wonder of a soul.  This one changed the
murk and gloom to brightness, and the deadly damp and cold to warmth.
It drew the girl Polly from the table despite her fears. She turned
involuntarily, made two steps toward it, and stood gazing while its
light played on her face. Glad whirled and ran to the hearth.

"Ye've put on a lot," she cried; "but, oh, my Gawd, don't it warm yer!
Come on, Polly--come on."

She dragged out a wooden stool, an empty soap-box, and bundled the sacks
into a heap to be sat upon.  She swept the things from the table and set
them in their paper wrappings on the floor.

"Let's all sit down close to it--close," she said, "an' get warm an'
eat, an' eat."

She was the leaven which leavened the lump of their humanity.  What this
leaven is--who has found out? But she--little rat of the gutter--was
formed of it, and her mere pure animal joy in the temporary animal
comfort of the moment stirred and uplifted them from their depths.

III

They drew near and sat upon the substitutes for seats in a circle--and
the fire threw up flame and made a glow in the fog hanging in the black
hole of a room.

It was Glad who set the battered kettle on and when it boiled made tea.
The other two watched her, being under her spell.  She handed out slices
of bread and sausage and pudding on bits of paper.  Polly fed with
tremulous haste; Glad herself with rejoicing and exulting in flavors.
Antony Dart ate bread and meat as he had eaten the bread and dripping at
the stall--accepting his normal hunger as part of the dream.

Suddenly Glad paused in the midst of a huge bite.

"Mister," she said, "p'raps that cove's waitin' fer yer.  Let's 'ave 'im
in.  I'll go and fetch 'im."

She was getting up, but Dart was on his feet first.

"I must go," he said.  "He is expecting me and--"

"Aw," said Glad, "lemme go along o' yer, mister--jest to show there's no
ill feelin'."

"Very well," he answered.

It was she who led, and he who followed.  At the door she stopped and
looked round with a grin.

"Keep up the fire, Polly," she threw back.  "Ain't it warm and cheerful?
It'll do the cove good to see it."

She led the way down the black, unsafe stairway.  She always led.

Outside the fog had thickened again, but she went through it as if she
could see her way.

At the entrance to the court the thief was standing, leaning against the
wall with fevered, unhopeful waiting in his eyes.  He moved miserably
when he saw the girl, and she called out to reassure him.

"I ain't up to no 'arm," she said; "I on'y come with the gent."

Antony Dart spoke to him.

"Did you get food?"

The man shook his head.

"I turned faint after you left me, and when I came to I was afraid I
might miss you," he answered.  "I daren't lose my chance.  I bought some
bread and stuffed it in my pocket.  I've been eating it while I've stood
here."

"Come back with us," said Dart. "We are in a place where we have some
food."

He spoke mechanically, and was aware that he did so.  He was a pawn
pushed about upon the board of this day's life.

"Come on," said the girl.  "Yer can get enough to last fer three days."

She guided them back through the fog until they entered the murky
doorway again.  Then she almost ran up the staircase to the room they
had left.

When the door opened the thief fell back a pace as before an
unexpected thing.  It was the flare of firelight which struck upon his
eyes. He passed his hand over them.

"A fire!" he said.  "I haven't seen one for a week.  Coming out of the
blackness it gives a man a start."

Improvident joy gleamed in Glad's eyes.

"We'll be warm onct," she chuckled, "if we ain't never warm agaen."

She drew her circle about the hearth again.  The thief took the place
next to her and she handed out food to him--a big slice of meat, bread,
a thick slice of pudding.

"Fill yerself up," she said.  "Then ye'll feel like yer can talk."

The man tried to eat his food with decorum, some recollection of the
habits of better days restraining him, but starved nature was too much
for him.  His hands shook, his eyes filled, his teeth tore.  The rest of
the circle tried not to look at him. Glad and Polly occupied themselves
with their own food.

Antony Dart gazed at the fire. Here he sat warming himself in a loft
with a beggar, a thief, and a helpless thing of the street.  He had come
out to buy a pistol--its weight still hung in his overcoat pocket--and
he had reached this place of whose existence he had an hour ago not
dreamed.  Each step which had led him had seemed a simple, inevitable
thing, for which he had apparently been responsible, but which he knew--
yes, somehow he KNEW--he had of his own volition neither planned nor
meant.  Yet here he sat--a part of the lives of the beggar, the thief,
and the poor thing of the street.  What did it mean?

"Tell me," he said to the thief, "how you came here."

By this time the young fellow had fed himself and looked less like a
wolf.  It was to be seen now that he had blue-gray eyes which were
dreamy and young.

"I have always been inventing things," he said a little huskily.  "I did
it when I was a child.  I always seemed to see there might be a way of
doing a thing better--getting more power.  When other boys were playing
games I was sitting in corners trying to build models out of wire and
string, and old boxes and tin cans.  I often thought I saw the way to
things, but I was always too poor to get what was needed to work them
out.  Twice I heard of men making great names and for tunes because they
had been able to finish what I could have finished if I had had a few
pounds.  It used to drive me mad and break my heart." His hands clenched
themselves and his huskiness grew thicker.  "There was a man," catching
his breath, "who leaped to the top of the ladder and set the whole world
talking and writing--and I had done the thing FIRST--I swear I had!  It
was all clear in my brain, and I was half mad with joy over it, but I
could not afford to work it out.  He could, so to the end of time it
will be HIS."  He struck his fist upon his knee.

"Aw!"  The deep little drawl was a groan from Glad.

"I got a place in an office at last. I worked hard, and they began to
trust me.  I--had a new idea.  It was a big one.  I needed money to work
it out.  I--I remembered what had happened before.  I felt like a poor
fellow running a race for his life.  I KNEW I could pay back ten times--
a hundred times--what I took."

"You took money?" said Dart.

The thief's head dropped.

"No.  I was caught when I was taking it.  I wasn't sharp enough. Someone
came in and saw me, and there was a crazy row.  I was sent to prison.
There was no more trying after that.  It's nearly two years since, and
I've been hanging about the streets and falling lower and lower.  I've
run miles panting after cabs with luggage in them and not had strength
to carry in the boxes when they stopped.  I've starved and slept out of
doors.  But the thing I wanted to work out is in my mind all the time--
like some machine tearing round.  It wants to be finished.  It never
will be. That's all."

Glad was leaning forward staring at him, her roughened hands with the
smeared cracks on them clasped round her knees.

"Things 'AS to be finished," she said.  "They finish theirselves."

"How do you know?"  Dart turned on her.

"Dunno 'OW I know--but I do. When things begin they finish.  It's like a
wheel rollin' down an 'ill." Her sharp eyes fixed themselves on Dart's.
"All of us'll finish somethin'--'cos we've begun.  You will--Polly
will--'e will--I will." She stopped with a sudden sheepish chuckle and
dropped her forehead on her knees, giggling.  "Dunno wot I 'm talking
about," she said, "but it's true."

Dart began to understand that it was.  And he also saw that this ragged
thing who knew nothing whatever, looked out on the world with the eyes
of a seer, though she was ignorant of the meaning of her own knowledge.
It was a weird thing.  He turned to the girl Polly.

"Tell me how you came here," he said.

He spoke in a low voice and gently.  He did not want to frighten her,
but he wanted to know how SHE had begun.  When she lifted her childish
eyes to his, her chin began to shake.  For some reason she did not
question his right to ask what he would.  She answered him meekly, as
her fingers fumbled with the stuff of her dress.

"I lived in the country with my mother," she said.  "We was very happy
together.  In the spring there was primroses and--and lambs.  I--can't
abide to look at the sheep in the park these days.  They remind me so.
There was a girl in the village got a place in town and came back and
told us all about it. It made me silly.  I wanted to come here, too.
I--I came--" She put her arm over her face and began to sob.

"She can't tell you," said Glad. "There was a swell in the 'ouse made
love to her.  She used to carry up coals to 'is parlor an' 'e talked to
'er.  'E 'ad a wye with 'im--"

Polly broke into a smothered wail.

"Oh, I did love him so--I did!" she cried.  "I'd have let him walk over
me.  I'd have let him kill me."

"'E nearly did it," said Glad.

"'E went away sudden an' she's never 'eard word of 'im since."

From under Polly's face-hiding arm came broken words.

"I couldn't tell my mother.  I did not know how.  I was too frightened
and ashamed.  Now it's too late.  I shall never see my mother again, and
it seems as if all the lambs and primroses in the world was dead. Oh,
they're dead--they're dead--and I wish I was, too!"

Glad's eyes winked rapidly and she gave a hoarse little cough to clear
her throat.  Her arms still clasping her knees, she hitched herself
closer to the girl and gave her a nudge with her elbow.

"Buck up, Polly," she said, "we ain't none of us finished yet.  Look at
us now--sittin' by our own fire with bread and puddin' inside us--an'
think wot we was this mornin'. Who knows wot we'll 'ave this time
to-morrer."

Then she stopped and looked with a wide grin at Antony Dart.

"Ow did I come 'ere?" she said.

"Yes," he answered, "how did you come here?"

"I dunno," she said; "I was 'ere first thing I remember.  I lived with a
old woman in another 'ouse in the court.  One mornin' when I woke up she
was dead.  Sometimes I've begged an' sold matches.  Sometimes I've took
care of women's children or 'elped 'em when they 'ad to lie up. I've
seen a lot--but I like to see a lot.  'Ope I'll see a lot more afore I'm
done.  I'm used to bein' 'ungry an' cold, an' all that, but--but I
allers like to see what's comin' to-morrer.  There's allers somethin'
else to-morrer.  That's all about ME," and she chuckled again.

Dart picked up some fresh sticks and threw them on the fire.  There was
some fine crackling and a new flame leaped up.

"If you could do what you liked," he said, "what would you like to do?"

Her chuckle became an outright laugh.

"If I 'ad ten pounds?" she asked, evidently prepared to adjust herself
in imagination to any form of un-looked-for good luck.

"If you had more?"

His tone made the thief lift his head to look at him.

"If I 'ad a wand like the one Jem told me was in the pantermine?"

"Yes," he answered.

She sat and stared at the fire a few moments, and then began to speak in
a low luxuriating voice.

"I'd get a better room," she said, revelling.  "There's one in the next
'ouse.  I'd 'ave a few sticks o' furnisher in it--a bed an' a chair or
two.  I'd get some warm petticuts an' a shawl an' a 'at--with a ostrich
feather in it.  Polly an' me 'd live together.  We'd 'ave fire an' grub
every day.  I'd get drunken Bet's biby put in an 'ome. I'd 'elp the
women when they 'ad to lie up.  I'd--I'd 'elp 'IM a bit," with a jerk of
her elbow toward the thief.  "If 'e was kept fed p'r'aps 'e could work
out that thing in 'is 'ead. I'd go round the court an' 'elp them with
'usbands that knocks 'em about. I'd--I'd put a stop to the knockin'
about," a queer fixed look showing itself in her eyes.  "If I 'ad money
I could do it.  'Ow much," with sudden prudence, "could a body 'ave--
with one o' them wands?"

"More than enough to do all you have spoken of," answered Dart.

"It's a shime a body couldn't 'ave it.  Apple Blossom Court 'd be a
different thing.  It'd be the sime as Miss Montaubyn says it's goin' to
be."  She laughed again, this time as if remembering something
fantastic, but not despicable.

"Who is Miss Montaubyn?"

"She's a' old woman as lives next floor below.  When she was young she
was pretty an' used to dance in the 'alls.  Drunken Bet says she was one
o' the wust.  When she got old it made 'er mad an' she got wusser. She
was ready to tear gals eyes out, an' when she'd get took for makin' a
row she'd fight like a tiger cat. About a year ago she tumbled
downstairs when she'd 'ad too much an' she broke both 'er legs.  You
remember, Polly?"

Polly hid her face in her hands.

"Oh, when they took her away to the hospital!" she shuddered.  "Oh, when
they lifted her up to carry her!"

"I thought Polly 'd 'ave a fit when she 'eard 'er screamin' an'
swearin'. My! it was langwich!  But it was the 'orspitle did it."

"Did what?"

"Dunno," with an uncertain, even slightly awed laugh.  "Dunno wot it
did--neither does nobody else, but somethin' 'appened.  It was along of
a lidy as come in one day an' talked to 'er when she was lyin' there.
My eye," chuckling, "it was queer talk!  But I liked it.  P'raps it was
lies, but it was cheerfle lies that 'elps yer.  What I ses is--if THINGS
ain't cheerfle, PEOPLE's got to be--to fight it out.  The women in the
'ouse larft fit to kill theirselves when she fust come 'ome limpin' an'
talked to 'em about what the lidy told 'er.  But arter a bit they liked
to 'ear 'er--just along o' the cheerfleness.  Said it was like a
pantermine.  Drunken Bet says if she could get 'old 'f it an' believe it
sime as Jinny Montaubyn does it'd be as cheerin' as drink an' last
longer."

"Is it a kind of religion?" Dart asked, having a vague memory of rumors
of fantastic new theories and half-born beliefs which had seemed to him
weird visions floating through fagged brains wearied by old doubts and
arguments and failures.  The world was tired--the whole earth was sad--
centuries had wrought only to the end of this twentieth century's
despair.  Was the struggle waking even here--in this back water of the
huge city's human tide? he wondered with dull interest.

"Is it a kind of religion?" he said.

"It's cheerfler."  Glad thrust out her sharp chin uncertainly again.
"There's no 'ell fire in it.  An' there ain't no blime laid on
Godamighty."  (The word as she uttered it seemed to have no connection
whatever with her usual colloquial invocation of the Deity.)  "When a
dray run over little Billy an' crushed 'im inter a rag, an' 'is mother
was screamin' an' draggin' 'er 'air down, the curick 'e ses, 'It's
Gawd's will,' 'e ses--an' 'e ain't no bad sort neither, an' 'is fice was
white an' wet with sweat--'Gawd done it,' 'e ses. An' me, I'd nussed the
child an' I clawed me 'air sime as if I was 'is mother an' I screamed
out, 'Then damn 'im!'  An' the curick 'e dropped sittin' down on the
curbstone an' 'id 'is fice in 'is 'ands."

Dart hid his own face after the manner of the wretched curate.

"No wonder," he groaned.  His blood turned cold.

"But," said Glad, "Miss Montaubyn's lidy she says Godamighty never done
it nor never intended it, an' if we kep' sayin' an' believin' 'e's
close to us an' not millyuns o' miles away, we'd be took care of whilst
we was alive an' not 'ave to wait till we was dead."

She got up on her feet and threw up her arms with a sudden jerk and
involuntary gesture.

"I 'm alive!  I 'm alive!" she cried out, "I've got ter be took care of
NOW!  That's why I like wot she tells about it.  So does the women. We
ain't no more reason ter be sure of wot the curick says than ter be sure
o' this.  Dunno as I've got ter choose either way, but if I 'ad, I'd
choose the cheerflest."

Dart had sat staring at her--so had Polly--so had the thief.  Dart
rubbed his forehead.

"I do not understand," he said.

"'T ain't understanding!  It's believin'.  Bless yer, SHE doesn't
understand.  I say, let's go an' talk to 'er a bit.  She don't mind
nothin', an' she'll let us in.  We can leave Polly an' 'im 'ere.  They
can make some more tea an' drink it."

It ended in their going out of the room together again and stumbling
once more down the stairway's crookedness.  At the bottom of the first
short flight they stopped in the darkness and Glad knocked at a door
with a summons manifestly expectant of cheerful welcome.  She used the
formula she had used before.

"'S on'y me, Miss Montaubyn," she cried out.  "'S on'y Glad."

The door opened in wide welcome, and confronting them as she held its
handle stood a small old woman with an astonishing face.  It was
astonishing because while it was withered and wrinkled with marks of
past years which had once stamped their reckless unsavoriness upon its
every line, some strange redeeming thing had happened to it and its
expression was that of a creature to whom the opening of a door could
only mean the entrance--the tumbling in as it were--of hopes realized.
Its surface was swept clean of even the vaguest anticipation of anything
not to be desired.  Smiling as it did through the black doorway into the
unrelieved shadow of the passage, it struck Antony Dart at once that it
actually implied this--and that in this place--and indeed in any
place--nothing could have been more astonishing.  What could, indeed?

"Well, well," she said, "come in, Glad, bless yer."

"I've brought a gent to 'ear yer talk a bit," Glad explained informally.

The small old woman raised her twinkling old face to look at him.

"Ah!" she said, as if summing up what was before her.  "'E thinks it's
worse than it is, doesn't 'e, now? Come in, sir, do."

This time it struck Dart that her look seemed actually to anticipate the
evolving of some wonderful and desirable thing from himself.  As if even
his gloom carried with it treasure as yet undisplayed.  As she knew
nothing of the ten sovereigns, he wondered what, in God's name, she saw.

The poverty of the little square room had an odd cheer in it.  Much
scrubbing had removed from it the objections manifest in Glad's room
above.  There was a small red fire in the grate, a strip of old, but gay
carpet before it, two chairs and a table were covered with a harlequin
patchwork made of bright odds and ends of all sizes and shapes.  The fog
in all its murky volume could not quite obscure the brightness of the
often rubbed window and its harlequin curtain drawn across upon a
string.

"Bless yer," said Miss Montaubyn, "sit down."

Dart sat and thanked her.  Glad dropped upon the floor and girdled her
knees comfortably while Miss Montaubyn took the second chair, which was
close to the table, and snuffed the candle which stood near a basket of
colored scraps such as, without doubt, had made the harlequin curtain.

"Yer won't mind me goin' on with me bit o' work?" she chirped.

"Tell 'im wot it is," Glad suggested.

"They come from a dressmaker as is in a small way," designating the
scraps by a gesture.  "I clean up for 'er an' she lets me 'ave 'em.  I
make 'em up into anythink I can--pin-cushions an' bags an' curtings an'
balls.  Nobody'd think wot they run to sometimes. Now an' then I sell
some of 'em. Wot I can't sell I give away."

"Drunken Bet's biby plays with 'er ball all day," said Glad.

"Ah!" said Miss Montaubyn, drawing out a long needleful of thread, "Bet,
SHE thinks it worse than it is."

"Could it be worse?" asked Dart. "Could anything be worse than
everything is?"

"Lots," suggested Glad; "might 'ave broke your back, might 'ave a fever,
might be in jail for knifin' someone.  'E wants to 'ear you talk, Miss
Montaubyn; tell 'im all about yerself."

"Me!" her expectant eyes on him. "'E wouldn't want to 'ear it.  I
shouldn't want to 'ear it myself. Bein' on the 'alls when yer a pretty
girl ain't an 'elpful life; an' bein' took up an' dropped down till yer
dropped in the gutter an' don't know 'ow to get out--it's wot yer
mustn't let yer mind go back to."

"That's wot the lidy said," called out Glad.  "Tell 'im about the lidy.
She doesn't even know who she was." The remark was tossed to Dart.

"Never even 'eard 'er name," with unabated cheer said Miss Montaubyn.
"She come an' she went an' me too low to do anything but lie an' look at
'er and listen.  An' 'Which of us two is mad?' I ses to myself.  But I
lay thinkin' and thinkin'--an' it was so cheerfle I couldn't get it out
of me 'ead--nor never 'ave since."

"What did she say?"

"I couldn't remember the words--it was the way they took away things a
body's afraid of.  It was about things never 'avin' really been like
wot we thought they was. Godamighty now, there ain't a bit of 'arm in
'im."

"What?" he said with a start.

"'E never done the accidents and the trouble.  It was us as went out of
the light into the dark.  If we'd kep' in the light all the time, an'
thought about it, an' talked about it, we'd never 'ad nothin' else.
'Tain't punishment neither.  'T ain't nothin' but the dark--an' the dark
ain't nothin' but the light bein' away. 'Keep in the light,' she ses,
'never think of nothin' else, an' then you'll begin an' see things.
Everybody's been afraid.  There ain't no need. You believe THAT.'"

"Believe?" said Dart heavily.

She nodded.

"'Yes,' ses I to 'er, 'that's where the trouble comes in--believin'.'
And she answers as cool as could be:  'Yes, it is,' she ses, 'we've all
been thinkin' we've been believin', an' none of us 'as.  If we 'ad what
'd there be to be afraid of?  If we believed a king was givin' us our
livin' an' takin' care of us who'd be afraid of not 'avin' enough to
eat?'"

"Who?" groaned Dart.  He sat hanging his head and staring at the floor.
This was another phase of the dream.

"'Where is 'E?' I ses.  ''Im as breaks old women's legs an' crushes
babies under wheels--so as they'll be resigned?'  An' all of a sudden
she calls out quite loud:  'Nowhere,' she ses.  'An' never was.  But 'Im
as stretched forth the 'eavens an' laid the foundations of the earth,
'Im as is the Life an' Love of the world, 'E's 'ERE!  Stretch out yer
'and,' she ses, 'an' call out, "Speak, Lord, thy servant 'eareth," an'
ye'll 'ear an' SEE.

"'An' never you stop sayin' it--let yer 'eart beat it an' yer breath
breathe it--an' yer 'll find yer goin' about laughin' soft to yerself
an' lovin' everythin' as if it was yer own child at breast.  An' no 'arm
can come to yer.  Try it when yer go 'ome.'"

"Did you?" asked Dart.

Glad answered for her with a tremulous--yes it was a TREMULOUS--giggle,
a weirdly moved little sound.

"When she wakes in the mornin' she ses to 'erself, 'Good things is goin'
to come to-day--cheerfle things.'  When there's a knock at the door she
ses, 'Somethin' friendly's comin' in.'  An' when Drunken Bet's makin' a
row an' ragin' an' tearin' an' threatenin' to 'ave 'er eyes out of 'er
fice, she ses, 'Lor, Bet, yer don't mean a word of it--yer a friend to
every woman in the 'ouse.'  When she don't know which way to turn, she
stands still an' ses, 'Speak, Lord, thy servant 'eareth,' an' then she
does wotever next comes into 'er mind--an' she says it's allus the
right answer. Sometimes," sheepishly, "I've tried it myself--p'raps it's
true.  I did it this mornin' when I sat down an' pulled me sack over me
'ead on the bridge.  Polly 'd been cryin' so loud all night I'd got a
bit low in me stummick an'--"  She stopped suddenly and turned on Dart
as if light had flashed across her mind.  "Dunno nothin' about it," she
stammered, "but I SAID it--just like she does--an' YOU come!"

Plainly she had uttered whatever words she had used in the form of a
sort of incantation, and here was the result in the living body of this
man sitting before her.  She stared hard at him, repeating her words:
"YOU come.  Yes, you did."

"It was the answer," said Miss Montaubyn, with entire simplicity as she
bit off her thread, "that's wot it was."

Antony Dart lifted his heavy head.

"You believe it," he said.

"I 'm livin' on believin' it," she said confidingly.  "I ain't got
nothin' else.  An' answers keeps comin' and comin'."

"What answers?"

"Bits o' work--an' things as 'elps.  Glad there, she's one."

"Aw," said Glad, "I ain't nothin'. I likes to 'ear yer tell about it.
She ses," to Dart again, a little slowly, as she watched his face with
curiously questioning eyes--"she ses 'E'S in the room--same as 'E's
everywhere--in this 'ere room.  Sometimes she talks out loud to 'Im."

"What!" cried Dart, startled again.

The strange Majestic Awful Idea--the Deity of the Ages--to be spoken of
as a mere unfeared Reality! And even as the vaguely formed thought
sprang in his brain he started once more, suddenly confronted by the
meaning his sense of shock implied.  What had all the sermons of all the
centuries been preaching but that it was Reality?  What had all the
infidels of every age contended but that it was Unreal, and the folly of
a dream?  He had never thought of himself as an infidel; perhaps it
would have shocked him to be called one, though he was not quite sure.
But that a little superannuated dancer at music-halls, battered and worn
by an unlawful life, should sit and smile in absolute faith at such a--a
superstition as this, stirred something like awe in him.

For she was smiling in entire acquiescence.

"It's what the curick ses," she enlarged radiantly.  "Though 'e don t
believe it, pore young man; 'e on'y thinks 'e does.  'It's for 'igh an'
low,' 'e ses, 'for you an' me as well as for them as is royal fambleys.
The Almighty 'E's EVERYWHERE!' 'Yes,' ses I, 'I've felt 'Im 'ere--as
near as y' are yerself, sir, I 'ave--an' I've spoke to 'Im."'

"What did the curate say?" Dart asked, amazed.

"Seemed like it frightened 'im a bit.  'We mustn't be too bold, Miss
Montaubyn, my dear,' 'e ses, for 'e's a kind young man as ever lived,
an' often ses 'my dear' to them 'e's comfortin'.  But yer see the lidy
'ad gave me a Bible o' me own an' I'd set 'ere an' read it, an' read it
an' learned verses to say to meself when I was in bed--an' I'd got ter
feel like it was someone talkin' to me an' makin' me understand.  So I
ses, ''T ain't boldness we're warned against; it's not lovin' an'
trustin' enough, an' not askin' an' believin' TRUE.  Don't yer remember
wot it ses:  "I, even I, am 'e that comforteth yer.  Who art thou that
thou art afraid of man that shall die an' the son of man that shall be
made as grass, an' forgetteth Jehovah thy Creator, that stretched forth
the 'eavens an' laid the foundations of the earth?" an' "I've covered
thee with the shadder of me 'and," it ses; an' "I will go before thee
an' make the rough places smooth;" an' "'Itherto ye 'ave asked nothin'
in my name; ask therefore that ye may receive, an' yer joy may be made
full."'  An' 'e looked down on the floor as if 'e was doin' some 'ard
thinkin', pore young man, an' 'e ses, quite sudden an' shaky, 'Lord, I
believe, 'elp thou my unbelief,' an' 'e ses it as if 'e was in trouble
an' didn't know 'e'd spoke out loud."

"Where--how did you come upon your verses?" said Dart.  "How did you
find them?"

"Ah," triumphantly, "they was all answers--they was the first answers I
ever 'ad.  When I first come 'ome an' it seemed as if I was goin' to be
swep' away in the dirt o' the street--one day when I was near drove wild
with cold an' 'unger, I set down on the floor an' I dragged the Bible to
me an' I ses:  'There ain't nothin' on earth or in 'ell as 'll 'elp me.
I'm goin' to do wot the lidy said--mad or not.'  An' I 'eld the book--
an' I 'eld my breath, too, 'cos it was like waitin' for the end o' the
world--an' after a bit I 'ears myself call out in a 'oller whisper,
'Speak, Lord, thy servant 'eareth. Show me a 'ope.'  An' I was tremblin'
all over when I opened the book.  An' there it was!  'I will go before
thee an' make the rough places smooth, I will break in pieces the doors
of brass and will cut in sunder the bars of iron.'  An' I knowed it was
a answer."

"You--knew--it--was an answer?"

"Wot else was it?" with a shining face.  "I'd arst for it, an' there it
was.  An' in about a hour Glad come runnin' up 'ere, an' she'd 'ad a bit
o' luck--"

"'T wasn't nothin' much," Glad broke in deprecatingly, "on'y I'd got
somethin' to eat an' a bit o' fire."

"An' she made me go an' 'ave a 'earty meal, an' set an' warm meself. An'
she was that cheerfle an' full o' pluck, she 'elped me to forget about
the things that was makin' me into a madwoman.  SHE was the answer--
same as the book 'ad promised.  They comes in different wyes the answers
does.  Bless yer, they don't come in claps of thunder an' streaks o'
lightenin'--they just comes easy an' natural--so's sometimes yer
don't think for a minit or two that they're answers at all.  But it
comes to yer in a bit an' yer 'eart stands still for joy. An' ever since
then I just go to me book an' arst.  P'raps," her smile an illuminating
thing, "me bein' the low an' pore in spirit at the beginnin', an'
settin' 'ere all alone by me-self day in an' day out, just thinkin' it
all over--an' arstin'--an' waitin'--p'raps light was gave me 'cos I was
in such a little place an' in the dark.  But I ain't pore in spirit now.
Lor', no, yer can't be when yer've on'y got to believe.  'An' 'itherto
ye 'ave arst nothin' in my name; arst therefore that ye may receive an'
yer joy be made full.'"

"Am I sitting here listening to an old female reprobate's disquisition
on religion?" passed through Antony Dart's mind.  "Why am I listening? I
am doing it because here is a creature who BELIEVES--knowing no
doctrine, knowing no church. She BELIEVES--she thinks she KNOWS her
Deity is by her side.  She is not afraid.  To her simpleness the awful
Unknown is the Known--and WITH her."

"Suppose it were true," he uttered aloud, in response to a sense of
inward tremor, "suppose--it--were--TRUE?"  And he was not speaking
either to the woman or the girl, and his forehead was damp.

"Gawd!" said Glad, her chin almost on her knees, her eyes staring
fearsomely.  "S'pose it was--an' us sittin' 'ere an' not knowin' it--an'
no one knowin' it--nor gettin' the good of it.  Sime as if--" pondering
hard in search of simile, "sime as if no one 'ad never knowed about
'lectricity, an' there wasn't no 'lectric lights nor no 'lectric
nothin'.  Onct nobody knowed, an' all the sime it was there--jest
waitin'."

Her fantastic laugh ended for her with a little choking, vaguely
hysteric sound.

"Blimme," she said.  "Ain't it queer, us not knowin'--IF IT'S TRUE."

Antony Dart bent forward in his chair.  He looked far into the eyes of
the ex-dancer as if some unseen thing within them might answer him.
Miss Montaubyn herself for the moment he did not see.

"What," he stammered hoarsely, his voice broken with awe, "what of the
hideous wrongs--the woes and horrors--and hideous wrongs?"

"There wouldn't be none if WE was right--if we never thought nothin' but
'Good's comin'--good 's 'ere.'  If we everyone of us thought it--every
minit of every day."

She did not know she was speaking of a millennium--the end of the world.
She sat by her one candle, threading her needle and believing she was
speaking of To-day.

He laughed a hollow laugh.

"If we were right!" he said.  "It would take long--long--long--to make
us all so."

"It would be slow p'raps.  Well, so it would--but good comes quick for
them as begins callin' it.  It's been quick for ME," drawing her thread
through the needle's eye triumphantly.  "Lor', yes, me legs is better--
me luck's better--people's better.  Bless yer, yes!"

"It's true," said Glad; "she gets on somehow.  Things comes.  She never
wants no drink.  Me now," she applied to Miss Montaubyn, "if I took it
up same as you--wot'd come to a gal like me?"

"Wot ud yer want ter come?" Dart saw that in her mind was an absolute
lack of any premonition of obstacle.  "Wot'd yer arst fer in yer own
mind?"

Glad reflected profoundly.

"Polly," she said, "she wants to go 'ome to 'er mother an' to the
country. I ain't got no mother an' wot I 'ear of the country seems like
I'd get tired of it.  Nothin' but quiet an' lambs an' birds an' things
growin.' Me, I likes things goin' on.  I likes people an' 'and organs
an' 'buses.  I'd stay 'ere--same as I told YOU," with a jerk of her hand
toward Dart. "An' do things in the court--if I 'ad a bit o' money.  I
don't want to live no gay life when I 'm a woman. It's too 'ard.  Us
pore uns ends too bad.  Wisht I knowed I could get on some 'ow."

"Good 'll come," said Miss Montaubyn.  "Just you say the same as me
every mornin'--'Good's fillin' the world, an' some of it's comin' to me.
It's bein' sent--an' I 'm goin' to meet it.  It's comin'--it's
comin'.'"  She bent forward and touched the girl's shoulder with her
astonishing eyes alight.  "Bless yer, wot's in my room's in yours; Lor',
yes."

Glad's eyes stared into hers, they became mysteriously, almost
awesomely, astonishing also.

"Is it?" she breathed in a hushed voice.

"Yes, Lor', yes!  When yer get up in the mornin' you just stand still
an' ARST it.  'Speak, Lord,' ses you; 'speak, Lord--'"

"Thy servant 'eareth," ended Glad's hushed speech.  "Blimme, but I 'm
goin' to try it!"

Perhaps the brain of her saw it still as an incantation, perhaps the
soul of her, called up strangely out of the dark and still new-born and
blind and vague, saw it vaguely and half blindly as something else.

Dart was wondering which of these things were true.

"We've never been expectin' nothin' that's good," said Miss Montaubyn.
"We 're allus expectin' the other.  Who isn't?  I was allus expectin'
rheumatiz an' 'unger an' cold an' starvin' old age.  Wot was you lookin'
for?" to Dart.

He looked down on the floor and answered heavily.

"Failing brain--failing life--despair--death!"

"None of 'em's comin'--if yer don't call 'em.  Stand still an' listen
for the other.  It's the other that's TRUE."

She was without doubt amazing. She chirped like a bird singing on a
bough, rejoicing in token of the shining of the sun.

"It's wot yer can work on--this," said Glad.  "The curick--'e's a good
sort an' no' 'arm in 'im--but 'e ses:  'Trouble an' 'unger is ter teach
yer ter submit.  Accidents an' coughs as tears yer lungs is sent you to
prepare yer for 'eaven.  If yer loves 'Im as sends 'em, yer 'll go
there.'  ''Ave yer ever bin?' ses I. ''Ave yer ever saw anyone that's
bin?  'Ave yer ever saw anyone that's saw anyone that's bin?' 'No,' 'e
ses.  'Don't, me girl, don't!' 'Garn,' I ses; 'tell me somethin' as 'll
do me some good afore I'm dead!  'Eaven's too far off.'"

"The kingdom of 'eaven is at 'and," said Miss Montaubyn.  "Bless yer,
yes, just 'ere."

Antony Dart glanced round the room.  It was a strange place.  But
something WAS here.  Magic, was it?  Frenzy--dreams--what?

He heard from below a sudden murmur and crying out in the street.  Miss
Montaubyn heard it and stopped in her sewing, holding her needle and
thread extended.

Glad heard it and sprang to her feet.

"Somethin's 'appened," she cried out.  "Someone's 'urt."

She was out of the room in a breath's space.  She stood outside
listening a few seconds and darted back to the open door, speaking
through it.  They could hear below commotion, exclamations, the wail of
a child.

"Somethin's 'appened to Bet!" she cried out again.  "I can 'ear the
child."

She was gone and flying down the staircase; Antony Dart and Miss
Montaubyn rose together.  The tumult was increasing; people were running
about in the court, and it was plain a crowd was forming by the magic
which calls up crowds as from nowhere about the door.  The child's
screams rose shrill above the noise.  It was no small thing which had
occurred.

"I must go," said Miss Montaubyn, limping away from her table.  "P'raps
I can 'elp.  P'raps you can 'elp, too," as he followed her.

They were met by Glad at the threshold.  She had shot back to them,
panting.

"She was blind drunk," she said, "an' she went out to get more.  She
tried to cross the street an' fell under a car.  She'll be dead in five
minits. I'm goin' for the biby."

Dart saw Miss Montaubyn step back into her room.  He turned
involuntarily to look at her.

She stood still a second--so still that it seemed as if she was not
drawing mortal breath.  Her astonishing, expectant eyes closed
themselves, and yet in closing spoke expectancy still.

"Speak, Lord," she said softly, but as if she spoke to Something whose
nearness to her was such that her hand might have touched it.  "Speak,
Lord, thy servant 'eareth."

Antony Dart almost felt his hair rise.  He quaked as she came near, her
poor clothes brushing against him.  He drew back to let her pass first,
and followed her leading.

The court was filled with men, women, and children, who surged about the
doorway, talking, crying, and protesting against each other's crowding.
Dart caught a glimpse of a policeman fighting his way through with a
doctor.  A dishevelled woman with a child at her dirty, bare breast had
got in and was talking loudly.

"Just outside the court it was," she proclaimed, "an' I saw it.  If
she'd bin 'erself it couldn't 'ave 'appened.  'No time for 'osspitles,'
ses I.  She's not twenty breaths to dror; let 'er die in 'er own bed,
pore thing!"  And both she and her baby breaking into wails at one and
the same time, other women, some hysteric, some maudlin with gin, joined
them in a terrified outburst.

"Get out, you women," commanded the doctor, who had forced his way
across the threshold.  "Send them away, officer," to the policeman.

There were others to turn out of the room itself, which was crowded with
morbid or terrified creatures, all making for confusion.  Glad had
seized the child and was forcing her way out into such air as there was
outside.

The bed--a strange and loathly thing--stood by the empty, rusty
fireplace.  Drunken Bet lay on it, a bundle of clothing over which the
doctor bent for but a few minutes before he turned away.

Antony Dart, standing near the door, heard Miss Montaubyn speak to him
in a whisper.

"May I go to 'er?" and the doctor nodded.

She limped lightly forward and her small face was white, but expectant
still.  What could she expect now--O Lord, what?

An extraordinary thing happened. An abnormal silence fell.  The owners
of such faces as on stretched necks caught sight of her seemed in a
flash to communicate with others in the crowd.

"Jinny Montaubyn!" someone whispered.  And "Jinny Montaubyn" was passed
along, leaving an awed stirring in its wake.  Those whom the pressure
outside had crushed against the wall near the window in a passionate
hurry, breathed on and rubbed the panes that they might lay their faces
to them.  One tore out the rags stuffed in a broken place and listened
breathlessly.

Jinny Montaubyn was kneeling down and laying her small old hand on the
muddied forehead.  She held it there a second or so and spoke in a voice
whose low clearness brought back at once to Dart the voice in which she
had spoken to the Something upstairs.

"Bet," she said, "Bet."  And then more soft still and yet more clear,
"Bet, my dear."

It seemed incredible, but it was a fact.  Slowly the lids of the woman's
eyes lifted and the pupils fixed themselves on Jinny Montaubyn, who
leaned still closer and spoke again.

"'T ain't true," she said.  "Not this.  'T ain't TRUE.  There IS NO
DEATH," slow and soft, but passionately distinct.  "THERE--IS--NO--
DEATH."

The muscles of the woman's face twisted it into a rueful smile.  The
three words she dragged out were so faint that perhaps none but Dart's
strained ears heard them.

"Wot--price--ME?"

The soul of her was loosening fast and straining away, but Jinny
Montaubyn followed it.

"THERE--IS--NO--DEATH," and her low voice had the tone of a slender
silver trumpet.  "In a minit yer 'll know--in a minit.  Lord," lifting
her expectant face, "show her the wye."

Mysteriously the clouds were clearing from the sodden face--mysteriously.
Miss Montaubyn watched them as they were swept away!  A minute--two
minutes--and they were gone.  Then she rose noiselessly and stood
looking down, speaking quite simply as if to herself.

"Ah," she breathed, "she DOES know now--fer sure an' certain."

Then Antony Dart, turning slightly, realized that a man who had entered
the house and been standing near him, breathing with light quickness,
since the moment Miss Montaubyn had knelt, was plainly the person Glad
had called the "curick," and that he had bowed his head and covered his
eyes with a hand which trembled.

IV

He was a young man with an eager soul, and his work in Apple Blossom
Court and places like it had torn him many ways.  Religious conventions
established through centuries of custom had not prepared him for life
among the submerged. He had struggled and been appalled, he had wrestled
in prayer and felt himself unanswered, and in repentance of the feeling
had scourged himself with thorns.  Miss Montaubyn, returning from the
hospital, had filled him at first with horror and protest.

"But who knows--who knows?" he said to Dart, as they stood and talked
together afterward, "Faith as a little child.  That is literally hers.
And I was shocked by it--and tried to destroy it, until I suddenly saw
what I was doing.  I was--in my cloddish egotism--trying to show her
that she was irreverent BECAUSE she could believe what in my soul I do
not, though I dare not admit so much even to myself.  She took from some
strange passing visitor to her tortured bedside what was to her a
revelation.  She heard it first as a child hears a story of magic.  When
she came out of the hospital, she told it as if it was one.  I--I--" he
bit his lips and moistened them, "argued with her and reproached her.
Christ the Merciful, forgive me!  She sat in her squalid little room
with her magic--sometimes in the dark--sometimes without fire, and she
clung to it, and loved it and asked it to help her, as a child asks its
father for bread.  When she was answered--and God forgive me again for
doubting that the simple good that came to her WAS an answer--when any
small help came to her, she was a radiant thing, and without a shadow of
doubt in her eyes told me of it as proof--proof that she had been heard.
When things went wrong for a day and the fire was out again and the room
dark, she said, 'I 'aven't kept near enough--I 'aven't trusted TRUE.  It
will be gave me soon,' and when once at such a time I said to her, 'We
must learn to say, Thy will be done,' she smiled up at me like a happy
baby and answered:

"'Thy will be done on earth AS IT IS IN 'EAVEN.  Lor', there's no cold
there, nor no 'unger nor no cryin' nor pain. That's the way the will is
done in 'eaven.  That's wot I arst for all day long--for it to be done
on earth as it is in 'eaven.'  What could I say?  Could I tell her that
the will of the Deity on the earth he created was only the will to do
evil--to give pain--to crush the creature made in His own image.  What
else do we mean when we say under all horror and agony that befalls, 'It
is God's will--God's will be done.' Base unbeliever though I am, I could
not speak the words.  Oh, she has something we have not.  Her poor,
little misspent life has changed itself into a shining thing, though it
shines and glows only in this hideous place. She herself does not know
of its shining.  But Drunken Bet would stagger up to her room and ask to
be told what she called her 'pantermine' stories.  I have seen her there
sitting listening--listening with strange quiet on her and dull yearning
in her sodden eyes.  So would other and worse women go to her, and I,
who had struggled with them, could see that she had reached some remote
longing in their beings which I had never touched.  In time the seed
would have stirred to life--it is beginning to stir even now.  During
the months since she came back to the court--though they have laughed at
her--both men and women have begun to see her as a creature weirdly set
apart.  Most of them feel something like awe of her; they half believe
her prayers to be bewitchments, but they want them on their side. They
have never wanted mine.  That I have known--KNOWN.  She believes that
her Deity is in Apple Blossom Court--in the dire holes its people live
in, on the broken stairway, in every nook and awful cranny of it--a
great Glory we will not see--only waiting to be called and to answer. Do
_I_ believe it--do you--do any of those anointed of us who preach each
day so glibly 'God is EVERYWHERE'? Who is the one who believes?  If
there were such a man he would go about as Moses did when 'He wist not
that his face shone.'"

They had gone out together and were standing in the fog in the court.
The curate removed his hat and passed his handkerchief over his damp
forehead, his breath coming and going almost sobbingly, his eyes staring
straight before him into the yellowness of the haze.

"Who," he said after a moment of singular silence, "who are you?"

Antony Dart hesitated a few seconds, and at the end of his pause he put
his hand into his overcoat pocket.

"If you will come upstairs with me to the room where the girl Glad
lives, I will tell you," he said, "but before we go I want to hand
something over to you."

The curate turned an amazed gaze upon him.

"What is it?" he asked.

Dart withdrew his hand from his pocket, and the pistol was in it.

"I came out this morning to buy this," he said.  "I intended--never mind
what I intended.  A wrong turn taken in the fog brought me here.  Take
this thing from me and keep it."

The curate took the pistol and put it into his own pocket without
comment. In the course of his labors he had seen desperate men and
desperate things many times.  He had even been--at moments--a desperate
man thinking desperate things himself, though no human being had ever
suspected the fact.  This man had faced some tragedy, he could see. Had
he been on the verge of a crime--had he looked murder in the eyes? What
had made him pause?  Was it possible that the dream of Jinny Montaubyn
being in the air had reached his brain--his being?

He looked almost appealingly at him, but he only said aloud:

"Let us go upstairs, then."

So they went.

As they passed the door of the room where the dead woman lay Dart went
in and spoke to Miss Montaubyn, who was still there.

"If there are things wanted here," he said, "this will buy them."  And
he put some money into her hand.

She did not seem surprised at the incongruity of his shabbiness
producing money.

"Well, now," she said, "I WAS wonderin' an' askin'.  I'd like 'er clean
an' nice, an' there's milk wanted bad for the biby."

In the room they mounted to Glad was trying to feed the child with bread
softened in tea.  Polly sat near her looking on with restless, eager
eyes.  She had never seen anything of her own baby but its limp newborn
and dead body being carried away out of sight.  She had not even dared
to ask what was done with such poor little carrion.  The tyranny of the
law of life made her want to paw and touch this lately born thing, as
her agony had given her no fruit of her own body to touch and paw and
nuzzle and caress as mother creatures will whether they be women or
tigresses or doves or female cats.

"Let me hold her, Glad," she half whimpered.  "When she's fed let me
get her to sleep."

"All right," Glad answered; "we could look after 'er between us well
enough."

The thief was still sitting on the hearth, but being full fed and
comfortable for the first time in many a day, he had rested his head
against the wall and fallen into profound sleep.

"Wot's up?" said Glad when the two men came in.  "Is anythin'
'appenin'?"

"I have come up here to tell you something," Dart answered.  "Let us sit
down again round the fire.  It will take a little time."

Glad with eager eyes on him handed the child to Polly and sat down
without a moment's hesitance, avid of what was to come.  She nudged the
thief with friendly elbow and he started up awake.

"'E's got somethin' to tell us," she explained.  "The curick's come
up to 'ear it, too.  Sit 'ere, Polly," with elbow jerk toward the bundle
of sacks.  "It's got its stummick full an' it'll go to sleep fast
enough."

So they sat again in the weird circle.  Neither the strangeness of the
group nor the squalor of the hearth were of a nature to be new things to
the curate.  His eyes fixed themselves on Dart's face, as did the eyes
of the thief, the beggar, and the young thing of the street.  No one
glanced away from him.

His telling of his story was almost monotonous in its semi-reflective
quietness of tone.  The strangeness to himself--though it was a
strangeness he accepted absolutely without protest--lay in his telling
it at all, and in a sense of his knowledge that each of these creatures
would understand and mysteriously know what depths he had touched this
day.

"Just before I left my lodgings this morning," he said, "I found myself
standing in the middle of my room and speaking to Something aloud.  I
did not know I was going to speak.  I did not know what I was speaking
to.  I heard my own voice cry out in agony, 'Lord, Lord, what shall I do
to be saved?'"

The curate made a sudden movement in his place and his sallow young
face flushed.  But he said nothing.

Glad's small and sharp countenance became curious.

"'Speak, Lord, thy servant 'eareth,'" she quoted tentatively.

"No," answered Dart; "it was not like that.  I had never thought of such
things.  I believed nothing. I was going out to buy a pistol and when I
returned intended to blow my brains out."

"Why?" asked Glad, with passionately intent eyes; "why?"

"Because I was worn out and done for, and all the world seemed worn out
and done for.  And among other things I believed I was beginning slowly
to go mad."

From the thief there burst forth a low groan and he turned his face to
the wall.

"I've been there," he said; "I 'm near there now."

Dart took up speech again.

"There was no answer--none. As I stood waiting--God knows for what--the
dead stillness of the room was like the dead stillness of the grave. And
I went out saying to my soul, 'This is what happens to the fool who
cries aloud in his pain.'"

"I've cried aloud," said the thief, "and sometimes it seemed as if an
answer was coming--but I always knew it never would!" in a tortured
voice.

"'T ain't fair to arst that wye," Glad put in with shrewd logic.

"Miss Montaubyn she allers knows it WILL come--an' it does."

"Something--not myself--turned my feet toward this place," said Dart. "I
was thrust from one thing to another.  I was forced to see and hear
things close at hand.  It has been as if I was under a spell.  The woman
in the room below--the woman lying dead!"  He stopped a second, and then
went on:  "There is too much that is crying out aloud.  A man such as I
am--it has FORCED itself upon me--cannot leave such things and give
himself to the dust.  I cannot explain clearly because I am not thinking
as I am accustomed to think.  A change has come upon me.  I shall not
use the pistol--as I meant to use it."

Glad made a friendly clutch at the sleeve of his shabby coat.

"Right O!" she cried.  "That's it!  You buck up sime as I told yer. Y'
ain't stony broke an' there's 'allers to-morrer."

Antony Dart's expression was weirdly retrospective.

"I did not think so this morning," he answered.

"But there is," said the girl. "Ain't there now, curick?  There's a lot
o' work in yer yet; yer could do all sorts o' things if y' ain't too
proud.  I'll 'elp yer.  So 'll the curick.  Y' ain't found out yet what
a little folks can live on till luck turns.  Me, I'm goin' to try Miss
Montaubyn's wye.  Le's both try.  Le's believe things is comin'. Le's
get 'er to talk to us some more."

The curate was thinking the thing over deeply.

"Yer see," Glad enlarged cheerfully, "yer look almost like a gentleman.
P'raps yer can write a good 'and an' spell all right.  Can yer?"

"Yes."

"I think, perhaps," the curate began reflectively, "particularly if you
can write well, I might be able to get you some work."

"I do not want work," Dart answered slowly.  "At least I do not want the
kind you would be likely to offer me."

The curate felt a shock, as if cold water had been dashed over him.
Somehow it had not once occurred to him that the man could be one of the
educated degenerate vicious for whom no power to help lay in any hands--
yet he was not the common vagrant--and he was plainly on the point of
producing an excuse for refusing work.

The other man, seeing his start and his amazed, troubled flush, put out
a hand and touched his arm apologetically.

"I beg your pardon," he said. "One of the things I was going to tell
you--I had not finished--was that I AM what is called a gentleman. I am
also what the world knows as a rich man.  I am Sir Oliver Holt."

Each member of the party gazed at him aghast.  It was an enormous name
to claim.  Even the two female creatures knew what it stood for.  It was
the name which represented the greatest wealth and power in the world of
finance and schemes of business. It stood for financial influence which
could change the face of national fortunes and bring about crises.  It
was known throughout the world.  Yesterday the newspaper rumor that its
owner had mysteriously left England had caused men on 'Change to discuss
possibilities together with lowered voices.

Glad stared at the curate.  For the first time she looked disturbed and
alarmed.

"Blimme," she ejaculated, "'e's gone off 'is nut, pore chap!--'e's
gone off it!"

"No," the man answered, "you shall come to me"--he hesitated a second
while a shade passed over his eyes--"TO-MORROW.  And you shall see."

He rose quietly to his feet and the curate rose also.  Abnormal as the
climax was, it was to be seen that there was no mistake about the
revelation.  The man was a creature of authority and used to carrying
conviction by his unsupported word. That made itself, by some clear,
unspoken method, plain.

"You are Sir Oliver Holt!  And a few hours ago you were on the point
of--"

"Ending it all--in an obscure lodging.  Afterward the earth would have
been shovelled on to a work-house coffin.  It was an awful thing." He
shook off a passionate shudder. "There was no wealth on earth that could
give me a moment's ease--sleep--hope--life.  The whole world was full
of things I loathed the sight and thought of.  The doctors said my
condition was physical.  Perhaps it was--perhaps to-day has strangely
given a healthful jolt to my nerves--perhaps I have been dragged away
from the agony of morbidity and plunged into new intense emotions which
have saved me from the last thing and the worst--SAVED me!"

He stopped suddenly and his face flushed, and then quite slowly turned
pale.

"SAVED ME!" he repeated the words as the curate saw the awed blood
creepingly recede.  "Who knows, who knows!  How many explanations one is
ready to give before one thinks of what we say we believe. Perhaps it
was--the Answer!"

The curate bowed his head reverently.

"Perhaps it was."

The girl Glad sat clinging to her knees, her eyes wide and awed and with
a sudden gush of hysteric tears rushing down her cheeks.

"That's the wye!  That's the wye!" she gulped out.  "No one won't
never believe--they won't, NEVER.  That's what she sees, Miss Montaubyn.
You don't, 'E don't," with a jerk toward the curate.  "I ain't nothin'
but ME, but blimme if I don't--blimme!"

Sir Oliver Holt grew paler still. He felt as he had done when Jinny
Montaubyn's poor dress swept against him.  His voice shook when he
spoke.

"So do I," he said with a sudden deep catch of the breath; "it was the
Answer."

In a few moments more he went to the girl Polly and laid a hand on her
shoulder.

"I shall take you home to your mother," he said.  "I shall take you
myself and care for you both.  She shall know nothing you are afraid of
her hearing.  I shall ask her to bring up the child.  You will help
her."

Then he touched the thief, who got up white and shaking and with eyes
moist with excitement.

"You shall never see another man claim your thought because you have not
time or money to work it out. You will go with me.  There are to-morrows
enough for you!"

Glad still sat clinging to her knees and with tears running, but the
ugliness of her sharp, small face was a thing an angel might have paused
to see.

"You don't want to go away from here," Sir Oliver said to her, and she
shook her head.

"No, not me.  I told yer wot I wanted.  Lemme do it."

"You shall," he answered, "and I will help you."

The things which developed in Apple Blossom Court later, the things
which came to each of those who had sat in the weird circle round the
fire, the revelations of new existence which came to herself, aroused no
amazement in Jinny Montaubyn's mind.  She had asked and believed all
things--and all this was but another of the Answers.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DAWN OF A TO-MORROW***


******* This file should be named 460.txt or 460.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/6/460



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

