The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Planet Mars and its Inhabitants, by 
Eros Urides and J. L. Kennon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Planet Mars and its Inhabitants
       A Psychic Revelation

Author: Eros Urides and J. L. Kennon

Release Date: September 27, 2008 [EBook #563]
Posting Date: June, 1996

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARS AND ITS INHABITANTS ***




Produced by Charles Keller.  HTML version by Al Haines.









THE PLANET MARS AND ITS INHABITANTS


BY

EROS URIDES

(A MARTIAN)




  DEDICATION

  To the millions of God's children on
  this earth enthralled in darkness, for whom
  the solicitude of the Father is now in
  evidence, this book is dedicated.


  May it be a beacon to light the way of
  weary searchers after TRUTH.



One hemisphere of Mars showing the North Polar Cap and the main Canal
System covering the planet.  The many thousands of small lateral
canals, radiating from the larger waterways, and which form an
important part of the general plan, have been purposely omitted from
the above to avoid confusion.  The circular spots and dots are the
principal reservoirs used for impounding water for use during the long
Martian summer.  The dark areas shown in the drawing are Mars ancient
sea bottoms now covered with vegetation.  It will be observed that most
of the canals are double, paralleling each other at a distance of about
seventy-five miles.  Centers of population are not shown for the reason
that space is not available on so small a drawing.  The City of Urid is
situated adjacent to the reservoir in the center of drawing, just north
of the equator.




CONTENTS

Chapter I.-EROS URIDES, of the City of Urid, planet Mars, the Author,
introduces himself and his book THE PLANET MARS AND ITS INHABITANTS.

Chapter II.-He describes the Population Centers, Temperatures and
Climate.  The whole Planet is gridironed with Canals.  (See Diagram.)

Chapter III.-He gives a full description of the marvelous Martian Canal
System.

Chapter IV.-Planetary Economy.  No Worries, and the Wants of all are
supplied by the Commonwealth.

Chapter V.-Property and Property Rights.  God, the Creator of it, is
considered the Owner of all Property.  Material things to the Martians
are but Expedients.  The Millions of Martians live as one great family,
though divided into families.  And it is this solidarity and filial
consideration towards each other that made the stupendous Canal and
other Works possible.

Chapter VI.-Trade and Barter are unknown.  Transportation is by Flying
Ships, and Gravitational Pull has been overcome.  Also, they use Cosmic
or Universal Energy.  All Distribution is from immense Warehouses.

Chapter VII.-A great many Clairvoyant Visions were seen by the
Shorthand Recorder, which make most interesting reading.

Chapter VIII.-Knowledge of God comes from within.  Selfishness has been
eliminated; and the Martians require no Policemen, Watchmen or other
Guardians of the Peace.  Christ is known to the Martians as one of the
great Powers in the Universe.

Chapter IX.-Mars has no Political System; yet it is controlled by the
very Acme of System.  Each Individual of their vast population is
guided by "The Light Within" and by "LOVE."

Chapter X.-Mars is ruled by LOVE, their only law.  There is no Evil,
for all are Good; all are Equal.  Truth is simple.  The people of Mars
are ready to  stimulate the living of the Christ-Life on other Planets.
(This is a wonderful and most Inspiring chapter.)

Chapter XI.-Education and Training of the Individual.  They have a
Spoken and a Written Language; but Telepathy is often used.  Set Rules
of Discipline are not required.  There are References to Jupiter,
Neptune, Uranus, Venus, Mercury, and the two Moons of Mars.

Chapter XII.-Education and Training of the Individual (contd).
Vocational Determination.  School Age.  Marriage.  Science and Domestic
Science.  Relativity of Time, Space, Motion and Matter. All in the
whole Universe is ETERNAL MOTION.

Chapter XIII.-Music is an Expression of the Father.  "All around us is
a beautiful RAINBOW UNIVERSE".  About Music of the Spheres, and that
Singing is highly developed.

Chapter XIV.-Aeronautics.  Inhabited Planets.  Sectarianism.  No Sound,
no Discordant Vibrations disturb the Atmosphere of Mars.

Chapter XV.-Life is an Attribute of the entire Universe.  The Planet
Jupiter is enveloped in deep gloom and Darkness.  Gives much
information.  Vesta, an Asteroid, is about 500 miles in diameter. Says
that communications between Planets of our Solar System and our Earth
will soon be realized, and that the initial Message will be from Mars.
It will herald a New Era for the people of Earth, and will break down
our narrow-minded Theology.

Chapter XVI.-The Risen Christ.  All the Mars people have lived on other
Planets before, except your Earth.  On Mars they live the Christ-Life
every day.  10,000 years ago the Mars people accepted Christ as their
Savior WITHOUT MURDER.

Chapter XVII.-Physical Environment is the result of Spiritual Causes,
and is the Result of our Mental Attitude.

Chapter XVIII.-Material Life is a Lesson, and is necessary for the
unfolding of Character.  The Martians have mastered their Natural
Passions.

Chapter XIX.-Eros gives a graphic Description of a Martian Home and
Surroundings, then shows how the Food is manipulated.  It is brought
from a Central Depot in a Mechanical Contrivance which is run
underground, thence up into the Dining room.  The Soiled Dishes are run
down and off the same way.  No Drudgery for the Housewife!

Chapter XX.-"ART." The Martians have beautiful productions in Painting,
Sculpture and Tapestries, some of which depict the Scenes and Episodes
incident on Christ's Visit to Mars ten thousand years ago.

Chapter XXI.-Eros Urides has a good deal to write on the subject of
"Scientific Sophistry," which has mostly to do with our Earth.



FOREWORD

It was Eros Urides, the real Martian behind the scenes, who dictated
the contents of this book through the medium to Mr. Kennon.  It was
further stated that "The medium was held in trance for short periods
only, as the medium must necessarily experience the atmosphere of Mars
which is more rarified than that of your Earth." Writes also that the
medium seemed to have some difficulty, and at first pain in breathing
while in the trance condition.

Mr. Kennon also wrote in his foreword of the original book that it was
not until January 4, 1920, it was decided to write the book in which
the Planet Mars, its people, its form of government, its Art,
Industries, Philosophy of life, etc. would for the first time in the
history of this world be given.

It appears that Jesus the Christed One of God visited the planets of
our Solar system, the planet Mars being one of those visited and
investigated.  And, as a proof of this it was Jesus Christ who
functioned as chairman or presidentat the great Peace Conference held
in the vast coliseum on the first sphere of the Heavens of our Earth.
That was in the year 1912, as fully reported in "World of Tomorrow,"
page 98.  It was at that conference He stated that Universal Peace must
be speeded up, as there were other planets to be investigated: and that
the Earth stood in the way and was becoming a menace to neighboring
planets.



CHAPTER I.

THE PLANET MARS AND ITS INHABITANTS

Years ago, as you measure time, I was an inhabitant of Mars, your
sister planet.  My name is Eros Urides (the latter signifying "of
Urid").  But a physical name is only an incidental in one's life.

In the Spirit world we are given a name in accordance with our
spiritual qualities and gifts and the kind of work we do.

I came into material being as the fruit of the sacred union of my
parents.  It is not necessary to say aught concerning their social
status, for on Mars all who unfold into a material expression of the
Father are equal.  Equal in rank, station, and in possession of the
material fruits of earth.

After my education had been completed I was, in accordance with the
Martian system of scientifically determining one's rightful vocation,
assigned as overseer to a section of one of the main canals supplying
water from the North Polar cap to an impounding reservoir near the city
of Urid, the place of my birth.

I was in the 36th year (Martian reckoning) of my physical life on the
planet when my transition occurred, which event was the result of my
inability to observe, one night, warning signals sent out from a
central station advising the eve of a tremendous drop in temperature.
This occurred in the Martian autumn, and I succumbed to the intense
cold.  I was not married, so I left no immediate family except my
parents, brothers and sisters.

I have come to your Earth to give your inhabitants some idea of the
idealistic life lived by your more advanced brothers.  I use the term
idealistic in a relative way only, for in God's universe the degrees of
material progress of His children are infinite in number.

In giving this information to the inhabitants of your world I have been
assisted by the spirits of many former wise children of your Earth.

The purpose of the information which I am about to impart to your
people is mainly to stimulate and hasten into material expression the
reign of God's kingdom on your Earth.

Many will reject this information, but it is God's truth nevertheless.
But on the other hand, many of God's children now functioning on your
planet will accept the statements as true, and they will be helped and
encouraged in their hard struggle for material existence.   This
struggle, unequal as it is, is the result of darkness engendered by the
loss of faith in God.

Man's faith in his Creator, in the ages preceding your present era of
darkness, was sublime.  Man's attitude towards, and his confidence in
the promises of God was as the faith of a child to its parents, whom it
has always trusted.  But selfishness has gained the upper hand, and is
now man's master on your Earth. To break the chains now binding man to
self is the purpose of God's holy emissaries, who have descended from
high spiritual spheres to your Earth to teach and show men the way out
of bondage.  They will succeed, for Omniscience has commanded it. It is
under their direction that I am now contributing my little part in this
movement.

I am only too glad to have been able to give the information contained
in this book, and I also appreciate the assistance of all those on your
Earth plane who so willingly assisted; but of course we are all obeying
the Father's command.

As life is an attribute of the entire universe, the material aspect of
all God's creations are the same.  That is, life on another planet must
be thought of as being no different from what experience teaches you.

All inspiration comes from the Father.  Hence, the degree of a race's
advancement in point of civilization is in proportion to its spiritual
enfoldment.  Therefore the material aspect of life, which includes
God's evolutionary and non-evolutionary creatures, is the same on every
habitable globe in limitless space.

In telling the story of Mars you must be prepared to believe that, from
a physical point of view, the Martians are just human beings, differing
little from the people of your Earth.

The same may be said concerning the activities of life enjoyed by all
of God's creatures.  Martians work and have their recreations.  They
enjoy the fruits of their earth just as you do the fruits of yours.
They have invented labor-saving machinery, and indulge in a multitude
of industrial pursuits, but with this difference: their economic system
is such that the life of the Martian is not the struggle for existence
you have created on your Earth.  On the contrary it is a pleasurable
life in which work is as much enjoyed as is recreation.  This condition
is due to two causes.  First, Mars is much farther advanced as a world
in its evolutionary career.  Second, the Spiritual enfoldment of its
inhabitants is proportionately advanced.

As the Divine Plan is universal in its scope the physical
characteristics of Mars, compared to your Earth are, in a general way,
the same, with the exceptions shown later in this book.

The inhabitants of Mars enjoy a blue sky, mountains, hills, rocks and
dells, clouds, beautiful sunsets, and in fact most of the physical
phenomena witnessed by the dwellers of your Earth.

The Martians live and have their being just as your people do, but they
are surrounded by a different spiritual and a modified physical
environment.  They take pleasure in music, art and the study of
physical science, but with this difference: the spiritual growth and
enfoldment of the individual is considered as most important, and all
material advancement as only an aid to ultimate ends.

With main points in view the reader can now readily comprehend the real
Martian character, although it may be a disappointment to some who have
imagined the inhabitants of Mars as physically different from
themselves; or perhaps, as semi-spiritual entities, who have possibly
been transplanted from other worlds to undergo a sort of probationary
life amid a Paradise of beautiful surroundings and things.



CHAPTER II.

POPULATION CENTERS, TEMPERATURE, CLIMATE

Although Mars is little more than half as large as your Earth, its
diameter being 4,200 miles, it contains a larger area of habitable land
than the latter, its surface area being approximately 212,000,000
square miles as against 51,000,000 miles for your Earth.  Hence our
globe supports a larger population about 13,160,000,000 people.  Your
population is in the neighborhood of 1,645,000,000.  Your land area is
161,000,000 square miles less than the land area of Mars.  This is for
the reason that your oceans occupy a vast surface of your Earth, and
Mars has no oceans, as these dried up ages ago. Consequently almost the
entire surface of our planet (with exception of some small areas
covered with swamps, remnants of ancient seas and oceans, and portions
of the extreme Northerly and Southerly Polar caps) is utilized by the
Martian inhabitants.

Our planet is gridironed with canals, many hundreds of the main ones
being observable through your telescopes, and the art of intensive
farming is practised by us to a degree of perfection never dreamed of
by the dwellers of your Earth.

Our winters, even in the Equatorial regions are severe, the
temperatures at times descending to as low as 80 degrees below zero.
However, our springs, summers, and autumns are mild and nearly twice as
long as your seasons, for the Martian year is 687 days long.  We grow
and mature many crops of necessary cereals, fruits and vegetables
during the spring and summer months, so that want is never felt by our
happy people.

Our method of irrigation is somewhat different from that practised in
the arid portions of your Earth.  We do not, except in a few instances,
flood our lands as you do.  Owing to the fact that our atmosphere is
much lighter than yours, the normal air pressure being only about 8
pounds to the square inch as against 15 pounds on your Earth,
evaporation is very rapid, and the dewfall, as a consequence of much
moisture being in the air, is very great.

This heavy humidity also tends to prevent radiation of heat, and the
temperature at night does not drop exceedingly low, although frost is
not uncommon even in summer.  As our vegetation is acclimated and
adapted to our environment no damage is done to growing crops by reason
of these frosts.

The Martians experience no difficulty in living in a rarified
atmosphere.  Neither have they abnormally developed lungs.  God has
made ample provision for the comfort of His creatures throughout all of
His infinite creations, and we of Mars are not excepted from this
Fatherly care and love.

Should an inhabitant of your Earth be suddenly transported to Mars he
could live but a few minutes, for the reason that his lungs could not
assimilate enough oxygen from our light atmosphere.

Economy is a science with us.  Nothing is wasted.  Every possible
square inch of ground produces food for man or beast.  Even the north
and south Arctic regions, after their seasonal thaws blossom forth with
vegetal growth, as astronomers on your Earth have observed.  These
regions produce their quota of food by being utilized as pasturage for
our cattle.  Immense amounts of forage are also gathered for the long
Martian winters, when a greater portion of either the north or south
hemisphere is covered with a mantle of snow.

The equatorial regions are always pleasant.  No severe wind storms are
experienced on Mars; neither do we have lightning or other magnetic
disturbances such as you experience.

As a corollary to the tranquility of our inhabitants living in peace,
Love and harmony, and the truths of God expressed in our everyday
living, the climate is equable, the atmosphere clear and beautiful, the
sky serene and sapphire-blue: the severest winds but gentle zephyrs
wafted towards the equator from the more remote portions of our globe.
Cloudy skies are rare and rainstorms few.

There is no lack of God's gifts on Mars.  As intensive farming is a
necessity on our planet, plant food or fertilizing elements are
plentiful.  One of the large  white circular spots observed by your
astronomers, located in a region on Mars named by them Elysium, and
which has been a puzzle to all observers, is an immense deposit of
fertilizing chemicals.  An immense well is located in this particular
spot which gushes forth a never-ending saline solution, highly
impregnated with sodium nitrate, potash and other salts.  The country
for many miles around is covered with a white precipitate which has
been carried by the moist air and deposited on the Martian earth.
These chemical compounds are refined and used to replenish the soil
with plant food.

There are 153,000 centers of population on Mars, but these centers are
not congested cities similar to those on your Earth. Every individual
has plenty of room to thrive and develop the best within him.

Our cities are not crowded and our buildings are beautiful in their
simplicity: large and roomy, with an abundance of sunlight and ample
ventilation.  White marble and metals are employed for building
purposes.

The inhabitants congregate in centers and, owing to our more perfect
methods of transportation, go forth daily to their tasks in field or
factory, to return at the end of their allotted period to home and
fireside.



CHAPTER III.

THE MARTIAN CANAL SYSTEM

The Canal system on Mars is comparatively new.  The idea of
constructing a planetary Canal system had its incipiency at the time of
Christ's visit to our planet.  The Master warned the people that they
must make provision for their future water supply.  At that time
(10,000 years ago) the water supply was becoming noticeably scarcer as
time went on.  It was nearly 3,000 years after the Master's mission to
Mars had been concluded that actual construction of the Planetary Canal
system was undertaken; and during the intervening 7,000 years and up to
the present time, construction on the public waterways has continued.

At the present day the system is most complete, but constant work is
required to keep the canals in working order.  In addition to the
gigantic Canal system, provision had to be made for suitable reservoirs
to impound the water after the seasonal thaws at the poles.  To this
end immense reservoirs were constructed at most canal intersections.
In some instances the reservoirs are established between parallel
canals; but in every case smaller canals, or laterals, always intersect
at these points.

Many of the canals on Mars are double, as they appear to your
astronomers.  These double waterways parallel each other at a distance
of about 75 miles.  The reason for this is that as the Martian
population is absolutely dependent upon the Polar waters to irrigate
their crops, any accident to a canal, such as a landslide stopping the
regular flow of water or the breaking of a lock or gate, would mean a
very serious calamity to a great number of people.  And for that
reason, soon after the main canals were constructed, second and
parallel waterways were made for the purpose of guaranteeing an
uninterrupted flow of water from the Poles to the Equatorial regions.
The result of this was that on many occasions the foresight of the
Martian engineers who had the water supply of the planet in charge,
saved immense areas from drought.

The rainfall on Mars is almost nil and the immense population (eight
times larger than that of your Earth) is entirely dependent on the
water supply from the melting Polar caps.  Water on Mars is a most
precious fluid and there is none to waste.  Our oceans evaporated ages
ago, and outside of the precipitation of moisture at the poles in the
form of snow, none is to be had anywhere else on the planet except in
very meager quantities.

The astronomer Lowell of your Earth, who made a life study of our
planet, called these reservoirs "Oases," but he was mistaken in his
theory.  He concluded that these points, which appear as round disks in
the telescope, were centers of population.  This conclusion is
erroneous.  The centers of population on Mars are scattered over the
entire planet regardless of the position of the so-called "Oases." It
is quite true that owing to the rapid evaporation of water in the
comparatively thin atmosphere of Mars, the dewfall for quite a radius
from the center of the reservoirs is considerable, with the result that
vegetation springs up, giving the "Oases" the appearance of a diameter
of about 75 miles.  The reservoirs are about 60 miles across and hold
millions of gallons of water.

The same explanation may be given of the Canals.  The dewfall on each
side is extensive, and the vegetal growth which extends the full length
of the water-ways and for thousands of miles in some cases, is most
prolific.

The water in the canals, in most instances, is distributed by gravity;
but recourse is had to a lock system and to immense pumps for raising
the water to proper levels.

The gates of the lock system and the pumps are operated by electricity,
the control of which energy is well understood by us.  In fact, we are
centuries ahead of your Earth people in the knowledge of the use of
Electro-magnetic energy.  (More will be given on the subject of
Electricity in a later chapter.)

Another source of mystery to your astronomers has been the appearance
of triangular dark spots at the origin of some of the Martian canals.
These have been referred to by your astronomer Lowell as "Carets,"
named so by reason of their peculiar shape. These so-called "Carets"
are the thoughtful provision for the impounding of a season's supply of
water.  In other words they are in part a lock system for raising water
to the level of some of the main canals, and embrace also a prodigious
pumping system.

These so-called "Carets," as the telescope will show, are located at
the edge of some of what appear to you as very dark areas on our
planet.  These dark areas are Mars' old sea bottoms, and in many
instances have been utilized by our engineers as natural reservoirs for
water.  Their convenient location near the Poles has provided ideal
facilities for the preservation of an adequate supply of water.

The construction of Mars' gigantic Canal system, planetary in its
extent, might seem to your Earth people an impossible task. And it
might prove so to your Earth dwellers should you undertake a similar
project in the ages to come when your seas dry up, though it must be
remembered that gravity on Mars, compared with your Earth, is as 38 to
100.  Excavations of large waterways then becomes a comparatively easy
task.  We have no high mountains on Mars; in fact, none exceeding 3,000
feet in altitude.

Owing to the difference in gravity the angle of repose on Mars is
nearly acute as against 45 degrees on your Earth, which permits of
almost perpendicular walls to the canals and lessens the danger of
landslides and cave-ins.  But above all, the biggest advantage enjoyed
by us in the construction of large public enterprises, such as are
embraced by our Canal system, is the solidarity and unity of purpose on
the part of the Martian people.  As Love rules our planet no internal
dissension or public misunderstanding exists among its people to retard
any undertaking that is necessary for the good of all.

It is lamentable that the dwellers on your Earth are divided against
one another.  Not only are your false ideals of racial, sociological
and religious distinctions a bar to your Spiritual and material
progress, but your political and economic falsities are as millstones
around your necks, which will ultimately lead you to destruction unless
you, as a people, retrace your steps and go back to the pathway pointed
out by Christ the Master 2,000 years ago, when He came to your Earth
with a message from the Most High.  The pathway is LOVE which leads to
a true understanding of God and the Kingdom referred to by Christ.

The Martian canals, as telescopic observation will prove in almost all
cases, follow straight lines.  When necessary, mountains have been cut
through down to a proper level.  Where the canals cross depressions or
old sea-bottoms, immense aqueducts have been constructed of solid stone
and concrete in such a manner that the water, in most cases, flows to
its destination by gravity.

That this has been a stupendous task may be more readily imagined when
it is known that the width of the main canals averages from one to
twenty miles.  This announcement might seem to many unreasonable, but
it must be remembered that the volume of water distributed over
212,000,000 square miles of territory is immense.  You might ask where
this large volume of water comes from.

The POLAR CAPS! During the Martian winter these extend down nearly to
the equator, and cover about five-sevenths of the planet's surface when
at maximum; and as the snowfall averages from six inches at the edge of
the caps to 50 feet at and near the actual Poles, some idea may be
gained of the amount of moisture taken care of by these artificial
waterways.  Ten feet of snow will make 12 inches of water, so there
exists on Mars an ample supply for all purposes.

(NOTE--The question as to why many of the canals germinate has been a
perplexing one to our astronomers.  Lowell observed that many of the
main canals germinated a short time after the commencement of the
Martian summer, and for a time it was thought that the phenomena might
be an optical illusion, and the latter theory was considered seriously
by some observers until the double canals were actually photographed at
the Flagstaff observatory, but the cause of the doubling was never
solved until the receipt of these revelations.)



CHAPTER IV.

PLANETARY ECONOMY

Economy is a virtue long cultivated on the Planet Mars.  On your Earth
you waste more than you use, not only in food but in the fruits of the
Earth.  You are using up your resources at a tremendous rate, and some
day you must pay the penalty.  Witness the wanton destruction of your
beautiful forests, the depletion of your coal beds and crude oil
deposits.  All this waste is the result of lack of Spiritual guidance;
a gross materialism: an inordinate selfish greed.  Instead of laying up
Spiritual treasures you are worshiping at the altar of Mamon.
Ultimately you will find your hoardings nothing but tarnished brass--an
illusion leading you on to Spiritual destruction.

With the Martians the incentive to live is to express life and be in
harmony with the Creator, to develop spiritually and build for
Eternity.  On Mars each one strives to live for his brother to the end
that all may inherit the promised Kingdom when yet as a physical being.
Commercialism with us is unknown, for no one works for profit.  The
products of the toil of all the inhabitants are for the public larder
and other necessities and even luxuries.

As a result of this system of public economy and industrialism,
sweat-shops, child labor, poor houses, public reformatories, and the
long list of pernicious and iniquitous customs in vogue on your Earth
are unknown on our planet.

No worries mar the life of the people of Mars.  Worry has no place in
the Martian mind.  The wants of all are supplied by the Commonwealth,
and each one contributes his best efforts to the common good, and in
return each individual is supplied his every want.  This is in
accordance with Christ's message: "Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and
His righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you."



CHAPTER V.

PROPERTY AND PROPERTY RIGHTS

On Mars all property is considered as belonging to God, its Creator,
who provided it for the enfoldment and comfort of His creatures.  No
individual lays claim to property in the sense that you Earth dwellers
do.

Through God's love does man inhabit a portion of the material universe,
but only for a season.  Man comes into material being to express life
and acquire an individuality, after which he passes out of material
bondage, when his place is taken by another.

At man's transition he takes with him only character, nothing else.  If
the things he has striven for during his material life have been but
chimeras: the material things of life: the fruits of the Earth, then in
that case he will find himself poor indeed.  The only real wealth, the
only thing worth striving for, is a knowledge of God and His Kingdom.
And with us Martians a knowledge of God is the ultimate goal sought
for.  Hence all material things to the Martian are but expedients, soon
to be forgotten.

Material wealth is an abstraction.  Its usual evidence is the
possession of property, which may be money, land, goods or chattels, as
the case may be.  In final analysis this concrete evidence of wealth is
not real.

Money is nothing more or less than a stamped token entitling the
possessor to so much human effort, for the real value behind money,
after all, is but so much human energy or force, varying according to
its quality and its worth.

Other forms of property such as goods and chattels, are the result of
human endeavor and may be secured by the exchange of money, or it may
be produced by the owner.

Wealth represented by lands, which were created by God for the benefit
of all humankind, and not for the individual, is the so-called
right-secured by barter, exchange or inheritance, to use or withhold
from use, at the caprice of the owner--of a certain piece or portion of
the planet.  Under a legal fiction the title to land extends to the
center of the Earth and to infinity in an opposite direction!

The text: "Thou shalt earn thy bread by the sweat of thy brow" has a
deep significance to one who has come into a knowledge of Truth.
Drones have no place in the Divine Plan.  It is not only essential but
mandatory, that each one do his part for the common good.  The
non-producing rich man is as much a drone as is the vagabond who
neither toils nor spins.  The Biblical test concerning the difficulty
of the rich man getting into Heaven means that it is impossible for a
drone or parasite to get into harmony with God.

The possession of wealth is not in itself sinful, but the possession of
wealth is a corollary to selfishness.  He who is unselfish will spurn
wealth.  The individual who accumulates beyond his needs sins against
Heaven when he locks up his goods in strong boxes.  The act of hoarding
deprives some creature of his just portion, for God has planned there
should be sufficient for all who make the effort, and a system that
permits an unequal distribution of God's gifts is in opposition to the
Divine Plan, and doubly pernicious is a church organization that
permits it.

Only after Christ has taken up His abode in the hearts of the people of
your Earth will surcease come to the suffering millions on your planet.

Happiness and selfishness are so diametrically opposed that the former
is impossible unless the latter is eliminated from your world, for only
real happiness comes after complete surrender to God.  Surrender to God
means subordination to His will.  His will on Earth must be done as it
is in Heaven.  All must be self-conscious of this.  If God's will was
adhered to on your Earth what a different place it would be! Instead of
a shambles it would be a paradise, the brotherhood of man and the
Fatherhood of God a fact instead of the dream of a few.

God loves all His creatures, both evolutionary and non-evolutionary.
His love is infinite in extent.  We are all His children.  Everything
has been provided for us.  It is only man's selfishness that deprives
any creature of his just dues. Man suffers want on account of his lack
of faith in God! Before man lost his faith in God he walked and
communed with angels.  He could do it now if he would but listen to the
Voice Within--if he would only open his heart to Christ, for help is
ready whenever one asks for it in sincerity and faith.

One of the sources of great injustice to the majority of the
inhabitants of your Earth is the belief in the dogma of Divine Right.
This dogma includes not only the absurdity of the Divine Right of
kings, but the Divine Right to the ownership of goods and land through
the Creator's favoritism for a few.

This dogma is the mother of untold misery and suffering.  Out of this
ungodly theory has evolved your shameful caste system; your shameful
economic ideas.

Your ancient feudal system of government has been but little improved
upon today over its primitive status, for you still draw well-defined
lines of class distinction between God's children--lines of demarcation
based on wealth and natal origin. With your inhabitants, communal
standing and social distinction is proportionate to the wealth of the
possessor or to the wealth or social standing of ancestors.

The monstrous heresy of Divine Right is an invention of the powers of
darkness and must be eliminated from your world root and branch before
your progress forward is assured.  God plays no favorites.  His love is
showered upon all alike.  His gifts are for all His children.  It was
never the Divine intent that a favored few should bask in the sunshine
of His grace while the majority suffered want and deprivation.  These
false ideas have been the procurers of darkness: of the Stygian gloom
now overshadowing your Earth.

Spiritual darkness has not always covered your Earth.  In primitive
times--ages ago--eras whose history has been lost to you, man on your
Earth was in harmony with his Creator.  This was in the Golden Age when
man and the angels of God walked hand in hand; when man communed with
God, and when the Christ spirit was abiding in the hearts of the
people.  In this age man was spiritually developed to a degree almost
unbelievable by you.

Then the time came when man listened to the temptor (his baser self),
and through the workings of the law of Atavism man degenerated almost
to the level of his animal prototype.

This incident in your world's history is the source of the legend of
the "Fall of Man" in the "Garden of Eden."  Man disobeyed God by
listening to self, by giving himself over to his selfish desires.  He
slew his brother, figuratively speaking, when he abandoned himself to
selfish ends and took advantage of his fellowman.  He has been guilty
of that sin ever since.  IT IS NOW INHERENT IN HIS MAKE-UP; THIS
SELFISH INSTINCT MUST BE ELIMINATED BEFORE HE CAN AGAIN FIND THE
FATHER'S KINGDOM.

No fences or other evidences of individual ownership surround the
millions of homes on Mars.  No lines of demarcation divide one plot of
land from another.  The millions of beautiful homes--beautiful in their
simplicity, for over-ornamentation such as the dwellers of your Earth
practise, is not tolerated on our planet--belong to the Commonwealth.
The same are allotted to the individual as a life tenure only.

The same custom prevails in the matter of personal property. Should a
Martian have use for a flying machine, also used by another, or other
kind of property for personal use, he does not ask the use of same in
the spirit that your Earth dwellers borrow from one another.  Use of
the needed article is requested with the idea that it belongs to the
community: that all material possessions are the common property of the
entire race.

THE MILLIONS OF MARTIANS LIVE AS ONE FAMILY.  IT IS THIS SOLIDARITY,
THIS FILIAL CONSIDERATION THAT ONE HOLDS FOR THE OTHER THAT HAS MADE
THE STUPENDOUS AND GIGANTIC PUBLIC WORKS ON MARS POSSIBLE.

In the absence of a universal unity of purpose intelligent life on Mars
would have become extinct centuries ago, when the last remnants of its
oceans and seas dried up and a planetary irrigation system became
necessary in order to utilize the frozen Polar moisture.



CHAPTER VI.

DISTRIBUTION OF COMMODITIES

Barter and trade are unknown on Mars.  The entire race of Martians is
cooperative, and the production of all necessities is based on the
needs of the Commonwealth.

Specialization in different branches of industrial activity is
centralized, as is the case of your Earth.  That is, some particular
parts of the planet, owing to climatic and other conditions, are better
adapted for the production of some special kind of raw material used in
the manufacture of clothes or other necessities of life, or the
production of some particular foodstuff.  But in every case the
incentive for industrial activity is not material profit.  On the
contrary the real incentive is compliance with the Father's will.

Transportation is effected by means of flying ships actuated by the
control of gravitational attraction.  These vehicles of the air, beside
your crude affairs[1] are most perfect, and the amount of freight
carried is unlimited, for the reason that the gravitational attraction
of the cargo is nullified as well as that of the ship.  (A more
extended explanation concerning this matter is given in another section
of this book.) Another motive power used is Cosmic, or Universal
Energy.  (We shall refer to this later.)

Immense warehouses and depots are scattered throughout the entire
planet.  These are centers of distribution.  These warehouses are
filled with what all the people of the entire planet need in the way of
food, clothing and other necessities of life.  These depots are in
charge of trained and competent workers who attend to the issuance and
distribution of all commodities.

When a Martian is in need of any particular commodity he makes
application to have his want supplied to the depot nearest to his
habitation.  He immediately receives the needed article.  If the
quantity and nature of his requisition is too large for him to carry
personally, the same is delivered at his domicile by the Commonwealth's
Transportation Department.


[1] NOTE--Yes, 35 years ago, but not today, 1955.



CHAPTER VII.

CLAIRVOYANT VISIONS OF MARS

In connection with the revelation contained in this book concerning the
physical characteristics of Mars, the compiler of this volume, as well
also as the medium, was given much information concerning this advanced
planet by means of clairvoyant visions.  These pictures were given the
writer at different times, commencing early in 1920, and continuing
until the book was finished.

As has been explained by the controls who have been instrumental in
giving the information about Mars, the purpose of these clairvoyant
pictures was to give the compiler of this book real visual evidence as
to life on Mars; and in particular, real pictures setting forth its
topography, which could be elucidated in no other way.

Written descriptions of scenery and of human activities necessarily
fall short of the reality, especially when an attempt is made to record
a series of events or a point of view outside the realm of our
experience.

The first picture realized by the writer, and for that matter the most
important one, was the view given him of Urid the Beautiful, one of the
most Important centers of population on the planet Mars.

It was while lying in bed one morning the writer was contemplating the
many messages being received from the Martian, who is the dictator of
the subject matter of this book, that he found himself at a strange
place, suspended as it were in the air over a beautiful lake of blue
water, whose surface was broken by gentle ripples, due to the soft,
balmy breeze blowing over the surface of the water.  The writer was
facing what seemed to be a westerly direction; and at a  distance of
about five miles there arose a series of small mountains about 2,500
feet in altitude. These mountains skirted the shores of the lake.  The
sky was a beautiful blue, bluer than the sapphire-tinted skies of our
own desert lands.  The mountains were tinted red from base to top,
except where the moisture near the shores of the lake had stimulated a
vegetal growth, whose green contrasted most harmoniously with the red
of the soil.  Two white clouds floated majestically near the peaks of
the highest mountains.

The atmosphere was impressively clear and all objects seemed to stand
out in sharp definition, a condition seldom seen by dwellers on our
Earth except in extremely dry and arid regions.

On top of a small plateau, forming the crown of a low-lying hill at the
base of one of the highest mountains, and about 1,500 feet from the
shore line, I was startled to see a large city.  The thousands of
closely nestling buildings seemed to be built of white stone.  The
writer was lost in admiration, for there in front of him the pure white
of the city, contrasting so vividly with the red soil of this faraway
planet, stood the habitations of an advanced race many millions of
miles removed from my own world.

The writer was impressed with the fact that, with but few exceptions,
the buildings of gleaming white were all one story in height, and it
became instantly evident that crowding is not tolerated by the
inhabitants of this progressive planet.  A few structures towered above
the rest.  These, as the writer was informed later, were the public
buildings dedicated to the use of the people as lecture halls, centers
for music and art, etc.

On a subsequent occasion the writer was shown a close-up view of Urid.
Flowers, grass and green foliage abounded everywhere.  The long streets
were broad and well paved, and flanked on two sides with long rows of
one-storied buildings of white stone, beautiful in their simplicity.
No extreme ornamentation is carried out in the erection of buildings on
Mars.  On the contrary, the simple square outlines characteristic of
our own Old Mission architecture seems to prevail on the planet Mars.
The same simple style prevails with the public buildings, except that
massive stone columns marked the portals of same, reminding one of our
own early Grecian architecture.

Many palm-like trees grew all over the city, especially in the
neighborhood of the public buildings.

A week after the occurrence of the above incident the writer was shown,
in the same manner as before, one of the many canals that gridiron the
Martian globe.  This particular canal is one of the main waterways on
Mars, and appeared to be about a mile wide at the point of observation.
The water was of a deep blue color, denoting great depth.  Along the
banks of this waterway could be seen many houseboats or floating
dwellings.  Some of these houseboats were very large and evidently
housed large families. The writer was informed that many Martians who
have charge of the waterways dwell in these habitations.

The banks above the canal were covered with green grass and many
flowers.

On subsequent occasions I was shown other canals and reservoirs, and
the manner in which some of the canals were cut through the mountains.
In some instances the walls of the canals were almost perpendicular.
Steep cuts, even in soft ground, seemed to be characteristic of all the
waterways observed by the writer.

On another occasion the writer was given a view of the North Polar
regions.  At that time the deep snows that covered the ground
everywhere were melting.  The country seemed to be very hilly.  As far
as the eye could reach I observed low-lying hills covered with a white
mantle of snow.  Patches of reddish earth here and there indicated that
the thaw was general and that the snow had thinned out in spots.
Between the hills I observed a large body of water, and was informed
that this was an artificial reservoir which had been created by the
damming of a large valley.  The sky on this occasion was hidden by a
mist, a very natural phenomenon in view of the fact that many thousands
of square miles of the country, covered with snow on this part of Mars,
was undergoing a rapid thaw.

That the large dark-colored areas on Mars, supposed by early observers
to be seas, are nothing more or less than low, swampy land covered with
rank vegetation, was evidenced to me on one occasion when I was
permitted to see the true character of these portions of the planet.

The rank vegetation was about three feet high and of a greenish red
color.  Interspersed throughout the mass of coarse-leafed plants were
high, dry stalks the remnants of an earlier crop of Martian flora.  The
season seemed to be advanced and all plant life was taking on autumnal
tints.

It was in December 1919 that I saw the first close-up picture of a
Martian--a woman.  Her head was covered with a thin veil which came
down to her well-formed mouth.  She seemed to be a most beautiful woman
with most expressive eyes.  Her hair was black. Her skin was unusually
white, which contrasted with the dark hair.  She wore no jewelry, or
other ornaments that I could see.

On a subsequent occasion I was permitted to see a Martian male. He was
playing a flutelike instrument, and as he was quite close to me I could
observe the wax-like texture of his skin.  This semi-transparency of
the skin is characteristic of the Martians, and evidences a life that
is free from the many bodily ailments that afflict humanity on our
Earth.  The Martian was dressed in graceful but loose-fitting clothes
of a reddish-brown color.  His eyes were a deep blue and his lips
seemed to be unusually red. In respect to stature he was, I would say,
about five feet nine inches in height.  In fact, on subsequent
occasions I have observed crowds of Martians gathered together and they
appeared no different from the inhabitants of our own world except as
to clothing, which is much simpler, but more graceful than our styles.

I was informed by the spiritual control that the fauna of Mars is
varied, but that all animal life is domesticated, there being now no
wild animals on the planet.

It was shortly after I had seen the Martians, described in the
foregoing paragraph, that I was shown two cat-like animals, which at
the time of my vision were engaged in playing about the feet of a
Martian.  They did not exactly resemble cats, but were more feline than
canine.  They were about the size of a large Airedale, and of a dark,
reddish-brown color with deep black stripes, similar to the markings of
our tigers.  They were very playful and cavorted about just as our own
dogs and cats do when endeavoring to attract the attention of their
masters.

On the morning of January 20, 1920, I was shown another Martian canal.
On this occasion I observed a large building on the banks of the
waterway near my point of vision.  This building was more of a
grandstand with a roof than anything else I can compare it to.  It
consisted of a large framework painted white, and was as high as our
two-storied structures.  A multitude of the people were inside the
building, some sitting, some standing.  They all seemed to be intently
gazing in a Northerly direction, up-stream.

Much green foliage and varied-colored flowers lined the banks of the
canal, especially in the neighborhood of the building.  The people all
seemed to be attired in holiday garb, and it was evident to me that a
celebration was going on.

Later I was informed that what I had witnessed was an annual
celebration observed by the people of Mars on the occasion of arrival
of the first water from the North Pole after commencement of the
Martian Spring.  It appears that this occasion is a very important
event with the Martians, as the arrival of the life-giving moisture
from the Arctic and Antarctic regions of the planet insures a season of
plenty for the inhabitants.  The water arrives at the equatorial
regions in a little less than a Martian month (60 days) after the
commencement of the Polar thaws and after a season of thanksgiving to
the Father has been held by all in appreciation of His bountiful gifts.
The Spiritual leaders of the different communities preside at these
gatherings.

The foregoing is in remarkable agreement with a statement on page 375
of the late Professor Lowell's book titled "MARS," as follows.

"The Canal quickening on Mars occupied 52 days, as evidenced by the
successive vegetal darkenings which descend from latitude 72 degrees
North and latitude 0, a journey of 2,650 miles.  The rate of
progression is remarkably uniform, and this fact that it is carried
from near the Pole to the Equator is sufficient tell-tale of extrinsic
aid, and the uniformity of the action increases its significance."

On the morning of January 21 I witnessed another interesting Martian
scene, which was almost identical with the previous vision of the
Arctic regions of this planet, except that the warm season was more
advanced, and I was permitted to see the country from another angle.  I
was facing East.  Most of the Polar snow had disappeared, and the
low-lying hills were now covered with a growth of dark green
vegetation, except at a few isolated points which showed small patches
of snow.  The sky was less misty than on the previous occasion.

On the evening of January 21 I was shown a flock of Martian sheep.  The
herd was small and I observed five of the animals at close range.  I
call them sheep for the reason that the animals resembled our sheep in
every particular.  The wool was very long and of a dark reddish-brown
color, except underneath their bellies which was yellowish.

On the evening of January 29 I had a vision of a beautiful woman with a
child kneeling at her feet.  She was seated on a chair and held a book
on her lap.  The symbolism of the vision was later explained to me by
the controls, who said: "Verily I say unto you whosoever shall not
receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter
therein."  God's truths are perceived only by those who can acquire the
simple faith of a child.

It was about the same time I had a vision in which I saw Sergius for
the first time distinctly.  He is the principal control dominating the
writing of this book.  He appeared very patriarchal with a long beard.
His features were decidedly semitic.  His countenance was most
spiritual and beautiful.

On February 10 I had my first vision of Mars' two moons, known to our
astronomers as Diemos and Phobos.  The latter appeared as a satellite
about half as large as our full moon, and the former like a star
brighter than the first magnitude, and could be compared with Jupiter
as seen from our Earth during a favorable opposition of that planet.
The latter satellite sheds considerable light on her primary.  An
interesting explanation of these two moons will be found in a later
chapter of this book.

On February 17 I was shown the actual appearance of our sun from the
planet Mars.  What I saw disproves the theory that owing to the
distance of Mars from the sun the latter would be viewed by the
Martians as a disk about half the size as seen from our Earth.  The
Solar Orb appeared as to size and brightness, about the same as viewed
from our Earth, and seemed to give forth its heat with the same
intensity.  I was facing the sun and its brilliance blinded my eyes for
an instant.

On the evening of February 29 I had a vision of a strange looking
creature ape-like in appearance.  The form was about five feet tall,
very hairy, his body being covered with a thick coat of woolly hair of
a grayish color.  He was smoking what appeared to be a cigar-like roll
of something, probably some sort of leaves rolled up into a convenient
form for smoking.  On the tips of his pointed ears were little tufts of
long hair, which gave his head a lynx-like appearance.  There were
quite a number of large yellow spots on his hairy chest.  His nose was
very stubby, and his entire face was decidedly apelike.

I was later informed that I had seen an inhabitant of the planet
Mercury, where life has not yet evolved to a very high degree, and
where man has not yet wholly emerged from his primary beast-like state.

Concerning the flora of Mars I have on various occasions viewed
orchards of growing fruit trees.  The trees were set out in rows
similar to the methods adopted in our own orchards.  The trees were
dwarf-like, being not over five or six feet high.  I was informed that
this particular species of tree was cultivated for its fruit and for
the fiber obtained from its large leaves, which is made into cloth,
thread and cordage.

On one occasion a short time after the chapter dealing with the
transmission of Electro-magnetic energy by wireless was received, I was
shown two immense towers on the planet Mars which are used for the
purpose of distributing power throughout the planet.  The two towers
were very close together, probably 100 yards apart and 100 feet high.
They resembled two immense round smoke-stacks, such as are common in
our factory districts.  The tops of the towers were surmounted by oval
caps, transparent as if made from glass, and protected by a system of
grill work.  While I was intently observing the towers there occurred a
blinding flash of light simultaneously from the two oval caps.

The surrounding country was covered with high trees, and it was
impossible for me to observe the base of the two structures.



CHAPTER VIII.

KNOWLEDGE OF GOD COMES FROM WITHIN

Mars, with its teeming millions of inhabitants, whose dwellings,
factories, storehouses, etc. cover most of the entire area, has no
watchmen, policemen or other guardians of the peace to prevent unlawful
acts on the part of its people.

As all property is considered as belonging to the Father, and is held
in common by the people of the planet, there exists no incentive for
anyone to steal.  Each individual has all he requires for his comfort.
Hence, why should anyone covet what is in the possession of his brother?

There is no temptation on Mars for anyone to take more than he needs,
for selfishness has been entirely eliminated from our planet.
Selfishness has no place among really civilized beings. It is a relic
of the jungle where it is necessary to perpetuate the lower animal life.

You of your Earth have reverted or degenerated to a primordial
condition or state through the law of Atavism.  This is a part of your
fall from Divine Grace.  And to induce man on your globe to realize his
pitiful condition and redeem himself is the work of the Spirits from
the higher Spheres who are now with you.

Mars has no Church system and no Ecclesiastical Hierarchy.  All
Martians recognize and worship one God, the Eternal Father.  Each
individual is taught from infancy to seek God through the doors of his
own soul, which is an institutional faculty possessed by everyone.

Jesus Christ, who came to your Earth 2,000 years ago with a message, is
known to us.  The Christ is one of the greatest powers in the
Universe--next to the Creator.

Your sectarian church systems are a hindrance to the proper spiritual
development of the individual.  These systems engender an element of
dependability on the individual which holds back his spiritual
enfoldment and perverts his true individuality, which must grow and
unfold before real progress upwards begins.

All knowledge of God should come from within and not through the
instrumentality of imperfect individuals, such as your religious
teachers are.

The present lack of interest (in 1920) in sectarian matters on the part
of the inhabitants of your Earth is evidence of a slow but sure
disintegration of a system that has held your people in mental and
spiritual bondage for centuries, and presages the dawn of a better day
for humanity on your Earth.



CHAPTER IX.

MARS HAS NO POLITICAL SYSTEM

When Love rules a community of people there is no need of
administrative bureaus for the regulation of the lives of the
inhabitants who make up the population of a planet.  For the same
reason Mars has no gubernatorial or political administrative center.

This announcement may, in a measure, be a disappointment to many
readers who have imagined that no considerable number of human beings
could live and prosper without the aid and guidance of a complex
administrative system such as you have on your Earth.

Bureaucracy and autocracy are evils resulting from an undeveloped
civilization, and have no place in a community where selfishness has
been eliminated.

When each individual of a vast population, such as that of Mars, is
actuated and guided by the Light Within there is no need for a horde of
political parasites to direct the destinies of the race.

This lack of an administrative system on Mars also applies to its
industrial and economic side.  The law of supply and demand determines
just how many  factories there should be, and just what output is
necessary for a given period.  But it must be remembered that the law
of supply and demand on our planet has no relation to a competitive
system such as yours, for we have no competitor, a fact that will be
impressed elsewhere in this book.

It is true that certain of our people who have been specially singled
out by the dominating influence of the Invisible World are occasionally
appealed to by those in doubt as to what is best for their individual
welfare, or the welfare of the community at large, to act in advisory
capacities.  These are the Spiritual Advisers of the planet, and are
really God's prophets.  There was a time when your race was guided by
similar individuals, as is evidenced from mention of them in your
sacred Scriptures.  But their usefulness was lost when man on your
Earth forgot God.

It was then that man mistrusted the Light Within, and disregarded the
unwritten laws graven in the soul by the Creator.  He clamored for a
Code of Laws and received them (through Moses). His next downward step
was taken when he admitted it was necessary to have interpreters of the
Law: for if the spirit of the Law had been kept there would have been
no misunderstanding or juggling of the letter.

Soon there was so much of this turning and twisting to suit man's
growing selfishness, that there was need for someone in authority over
all the interpreters, whose word should be final.  So your people cried
aloud for Kings.  And you have them, and your law has grown to immense
proportions, as have also the clever sins of your selfishness.  WHERE
THERE IS NO SIN THERE IS NO NEED OF LAWS; FOR THE RIGHTEOUS MAN IS A
LAW UNTO HIMSELF.

It must not be imagined that because of the lack of a political system
on Mars, such as you deem necessary on your Earth, that all is chaos
and life a sort of happy-go-lucky existence.  On the contrary, the
Martian existence is controlled by the acme of system, which is in
accordance with the law of Divine Harmony.  A system from which has
been eliminated all the useless wheels which so clog up your lives and
make your progress slow indeed.



CHAPTER X.

MARS IS RULED BY LOVE

"And now abideth Faith, Hope and Love: these three; but the greatest of
these is LOVE." Paul to the Corinthians.

THERE IS BUT ONE LAW ON MARS.  THAT LAW IS LOVE.

This law is not written in a code for the guidance of the people.

It is graven in the hearts of the inhabitants, and is reflected in the
countenance of every individual.

This law is the incentive before the entire population and urges each
individual onward to the completion of the task before him.

There are no rulers to bow before: neither is anyone better than his
brother.  There is no evil, for all are good: all are equal. God endows
every individual expression of life with the Divine Heritage of a pure
soul.  It is the individual's concern to keep this heavenly gift
unstained in its descent into matter.  The love force of the Spirit is
the potent agent that does this for the individual when allowed to
permeate and radiate the entire being.  When individuals have learned
to bathe their innermost beings in the Father's love, then it must
follow that a nation made up of such individuals will be governed only
by such precepts as are evolved from this dominating Love-force.

It is of no import to the individual on this planet what his particular
task may be, for all work is for the Father; and the humblest vocation
(humbler from the point of view of the dwellers on your Earth) is as
important and as honorable as the highest.

MARS IS RULED BY LOVE, which is in accordance with the Divine Intent.
It is the desire of the Father that every world in limitless space
inhabited by His children be ruled by that Divine Principle.  For when
Love is the supreme law of a world, as it is of the Universe, there is
no need of a system of complex laws and a horde of judicial officers to
interpret and enforce them.

When Love enters into the life of a community selfishness makes its
exit: misery becomes a stranger and pain and sickness vanish.

From the cradle to transition the Martian is dominated by Love and
guided by the Father's will.  The result of this Love-rule is
individual and communal happiness.  But above all, a Spiritual progress
that unfolds the individual in accordance with the Cosmic Intent.

To die, in the sense of passing out of one's physical environment, is
the destiny of every created being.  Hence, in that sense, death exists
on Mars as it does on your Earth.  But the real death referred to by
Christ: a Spiritual death imposed on man by his fall from Grace, a
penalty for having forgotten God, is unknown on this planet Mars.  We
are in harmony with the Father.  Those who are spiritually dead are cut
off from the Father as a result of their indifference and ignorance of
Spiritual Truth.

The religion of the Martian may be expressed in two thoughts: "LOVE"
and "THY WILL BE DONE, NOT MINE." The true definition of Religion is a
"RULE OF LIFE," and as our lives are guided entirely by Love and the
Father's Will.  WE HAVE A RELIGION.

You, on your Earth, have created a Religion to satisfy your
conventionalities.  Truth is simple, but you have made it intricate.
It is free, yet you buy it from the would-be disciples.  Both you and
we must approach Him in simple faith: "Unless ye become as little
children ye cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven."

Speaking of children, I desire to give expression to a thought that may
appear to be outside the subject: it is this: The beauty and simplicity
of youth is wonderful, and to be admired by all: but in the sight of
the Heavenly Father, and those who have progressed to higher realms, it
is not so wonderful as those older characters who have waded the
marshes of life, as it were, and who have trod the dirty steps without
losing faith.

This is to encourage those who sometimes think when they look back on
their lives that all is dark.  Their strength is being tried in the
darkness.  Therefore their courage and faith is so much more.

We who are giving you these messages have passed beyond the stage you
are in, and do not have to be tried on every hand.  We look upon you
who are struggling through the pitfalls created by your false systems
with pity, knowing how great your trials are.  Do not think that
because we have gone on to higher planes of life that we are out of
sympathy with you.  The more we bask in the sunshine of Love the more
tender we become to those in the shadow.  And if you would only realize
how strong you are, with the Father's love and His real consideration
for you, you would try so much harder to better your condition by
meeting His Love with Love.

We of Mars have learnt to keep the right pictures before the minds of
our youth that they may not be so sorely tried, but on your planet you
have not even the beginning of a system whereby there could be kept
continually before the minds of your children the real goal to be
striven for.  I make exception of the few homes on your planet where
the parents are in spiritual growth, but these homes are not
ideal--just a beginning of Idealism.  But they are better far than the
masses in their home conditions on your planet.

Now, we are ready to do all we can towards stimulating the living of
the Christ-life among all souls in the Universe when it can be so
arranged: but it will take aeons of time on some planets, and many
decades on yours before we can scientifically teach you.  To be sure,
we are giving you all we can for this book, but it will not be
universally accepted, although it will bring great joy to those who
have faith.

If you can keep some of the pictures we are giving you of the wonderful
happiness we possess it will help you in the sordidness of your own
life.  Picture beautiful things and your heart must be beautiful.
Strive with all your mind to hold beautiful thoughts, for it is well
worth your every effort towards faith.



CHAPTER XI.

EDUCATION AND TRAINING OF THE INDIVIDUAL

The people of Mars have a spoken and written language, but not so
filled with complexities as yours, for the reason that owing to the
high development of the mental faculties thoughts are almost as audible
as words.  Hence, converse between individuals on our planet is not
altogether a series of vocal ejaculations.  On the contrary, among the
older members of the race, communication between individuals is in some
cases audibly imperceptible.

Printed books are used, but mostly for the very young, as information
is usually transmitted impressionally.

Education on Mars begins at the mother's knee.  The first knowledge
imparted to the young is Spiritual.  The first lessons given to the
child are: One's absolute dependence on God, and that the few years
before the individual are but an unfoldment, or an individualizing of
the entity into a separate and distinct unit.

The Spiritual lessons are amplified as the child grows and grasps these
truths.  This procedure continues until the pupil is ready to enter an
institution of learning.

THE HOME IS THE PRIMARY SCHOOL, JUST AS A PHYSICAL EXISTENCE ON A
PLANET IS THE KINDERGARTEN OF A NEVER-ENDING LIFE.  THE PARENTS ARE THE
FIRST TEACHERS.

The primary education consists, as already said, in lessons on the
necessity of expressing God in our lives in truth and righteousness in
order that the mind of the individual be so moulded and fashioned that
absolute faith is placed in God's promises through the Master, Christ.

The keynote to the education of the individual is that one must first
seek God's Kingdom, and that all knowledge and wisdom, which is the
Divine Heritage of all, will be easily attained: and that coming into a
knowledge of God means health, happiness and wisdom.

After the individual has grasped the primary lessons, which result in
an unfoldment of the spirit within, he is then sent to a school; but a
school system different from anything you have on your Earth.  The task
of the teacher is, not to teach knowledge but to assist in bringing out
what is already latent in the soul, rather than a set routine, for
every individual is considered a master in some line of thought and
activity.  The pupil is led into knowledge instead of being taught
directly.

The individual is left to his own tastes and volition.  The harmony of
music of God's laws, which embrace Astronomy, Physics and of Life,
together with a knowledge of the laws of Electricity, is especially
brought to the attention of the individual.  You of the Earth know as
yet very little concerning the true nature of Electricity.  Your
methods of handling and generating this wonderful force are crude
indeed, by comparison with the deep knowledge attained on Mars with the
subject.

And so with the study and development of the Harmony of Music, we of
Mars have developed a high spiritual sense, and are able to hear and
see many intermediate degrees of vibration that do not exist at all for
you.  Of course there are some exceptions among the few of your Earth
who, after having striven hard for light have been favored by God's
angels in the development of a higher Spirituality.

Our teachers are guides who look after their charges in an atmosphere
of Love and, as a result, right conceptions of Truth are acquired by
the pupil.

Thought is the expression or fruit of the Spirit, and Martian children
are never allowed to forget their Spiritual growth.  As a consequence
of this they are easily led into true knowledge, and having a broad
vision are able to see all things in their true relations.  They begin
at the cause and work towards the effect, which is the opposite of your
system.

No set rules of discipline are used in the schools.  Indeed they are
not necessary for the reason that the one ideal: the one goal impressed
on the mind of the pupil is the complete expression of the Father
Within, for to express the Father is to have perfect life, life in
abundance.

Concentration of mind, economy of time and energy are studied and
learned by the child in the early part of his career.

Astronomy on our planet offers an ideal field in seeking an
understanding of the reign of immutable law through the Infinite
Universe of God, and owing to the clear rarified atmosphere of Mars,
unusual opportunity is presented to students in visual observations of
the Heavens.

Entire classes of advanced students, accompanied by their teacher
guides repair to the open at night when the canopy of God's Heavens is
ablaze with scintillating points of light.  The different
constellations as viewed from our planet present the same general
appearance as to configuration as they do to the dwellers on your
Earth; but the view is decidedly more vivid by reason of a more
advantageous viewpoint.

The so-called Superior planets, such as Saturn, Jupiter, some of the
larger asteroids, and Uranus and Neptune, are nearer to Mars than to
Earth, and for that reason are more easily discerned from this vantage
point.  Some of the satellites of Jupiter are easily seen with the
naked eye.

Your Earth appears to us about as Jupiter does to you, and with our
observing instruments we are able to see your continent and oceans when
not covered by a cloud canopy.

As to the so-called Inferior planets Venus and Mercury, the former
presents the appearance of a star of the first magnitude, but being so
near the sun it is only visible an hour before or after sunset,
depending upon its position.  But Mercury, being so near the Solar Orb,
it is rarely its position is favorable for observation from our planet,
and then only with our more perfect telescopes.

Our students view the phenomena of eclipses of the sun and our planet
with the greatest interest, just as your astronomers do.

Mars' two moons present what would appear to you a most striking
phenomenon, for one rises in the East and the other in the West,
passing each other at times within view of observers.  The most distant
satellite of Mars is known to us as Laster, to which has been given the
name of Deimos by the first observers on your Earth.  Approximately 132
hours elapse between its rising and setting at any particular point on
our planet, as a consequence of the fact that it revolves in 30 hours
18 minutes at a distance of 14,600 miles more or less from its primary;
and as Mars rotates in 24 hours 37 minutes from East to West the motion
is almost neutralized by the circulation of this satellite.

During the time of its rotation it changes four times from full to new
and new to full.  The appearance of this satellite to the Martians is
equal, if not a little brighter than the view of Jupiter from your
Earth.

The second satellite, known to us as Benii, and to your astronomers as
Phobos, sheds considerable amount of light on the Martian landscape by
means of its large size and close proximity, being distant about 3,700
miles from the surface of Mars.  This satellite is shut out from view
beyond 69 degrees latitude by reason of the curvature of its primary.
Its period is 7 hours and 30 minutes--less than one-third the time of
the rotation of Mars.  It rises in the West and courses across the
Heavens in 11 hours, during which time it undergoes one entire cycle of
its phases and gets through half another.  Its disc appears to us as a
little more than half of the moon's disc on your Earth at full appears
to you.

The realm of Physics presents another interesting study to the Martian
student.  We have advanced to the study of Nature's laws to a point
which would appear to your understanding most incomprehensible.  Long
ago we mastered the knowledge of the method of releasing Interatomic
Energy,[2] a knowledge which in the brain of an unscrupulous person
would be most disastrous, not only to himself but to those about him.
The energy locked up in an atom of matter is tremendous, and the
release of this power is only a matter of knowing the law.  The
inhabitants of your world will have to bide a long time before the key
that will release this giant is placed within their reach.

Not until you have eliminated your inherent selfishness; not before you
have learnt the lesson as Christ taught it will you be permitted to
harness one of the mightiest forces in the universe, a force equally as
great for evil as it is for good.  This knowledge we have, and we have
utilized it in the construction and building of our mighty planetary
projects.

This Interatomic Energy is the source of the sun's continuous heat.  If
it were combustion the Solar orb would have burnt itself out ages ago.
All your theories to account for the continuity of solar radiation are
in error.  The release of Interatomic Energy in the sun at a definite
rate is the reason why its heat never increases or diminishes though
millions of years come and go in endless procession.

And this process is not the working of a blind, senseless force, some
of your scientists would have you believe, but the Creator: Omnipotent,
Omniscient, Omnipresent is the Dominator: the Directing Intelligence,
who sees to it that all is provided for His children.

On your Earth you have thus far discovered some 85 elements.  In order
to complete the list of 92, to conform to the so-called Periodic Table,
there are yet seven elements to be found by your scientists.  On Mars
the most elementary school pupil is well informed on the subject, and
has knowledge of the complete list among the new elements yet to be
discovered by your chemists, and which exist in appreciable quantities
on your Earth, is one which has the peculiar property of neutralizing
Gravity.

This neutralizing is accomplished by screening off the gravitational
pull when interposed between the Earth and the matter sought to be made
immune from the attraction, just as you would insulate against the flow
of electricity by interposing a non-conductor between two conducting
metals.

The knowledge and use of this element on Mars has been utilized in the
solution of our transportation problem.  Instead of cumbersome
railroads consuming energy at a great loss, we use an almost perfect
flying or floating ship.  It is made buoyant by being screened from the
gravitational pull of the planet.[3]

Another subject of importance, that takes no little time to understand
by the Martian student is the part played by the planet's satellites in
the generation  of Electro-Magnetic energy.  The sun together with its
circulating family of planets is a huge Electric motor, so a planet and
its satellites are minor generators of Electric energy.  Satellites
have a higher importance and necessity than the mere creation of
moonshine.

All the planets have their satellites, although your astronomers have
not yet discovered any in the case of Mercury and Venus. The latter
planet has a satellite whose distance is so close to its primary that
its presence is lost in the intense reflection of light caused by
Venus' cloudy atmosphere, which is much denser than that of your Earth.
In the case of Mercury, owing to its extremely close proximity to the
sun, its satellite probably never will be seen by observers on your
Earth, as it is lost in the intense brilliance cast by the Solar Orb on
this planet.


[2] The Popular Science Monthly, May, 1920, printed the following--"Sir
Oliver Lodge thinks that man is not yet civilized enough to use the
energy hidden in ordinary matter.   The time will come when atomic
energy will take the place of coal as a source of power."  The man who
spoke thus before the Royal Society of Arts in London was Sir Oliver
Lodge--one of the towering figures in modern science, a man who has
devoted the better part of his life to the study and interpretation of
the atom.   This new form of energy, which our great-grandchildren may
utilize instead of oil and coal, has possibilities so appalling that
Sir Oliver almost rejoices that we do not know how to release it.  I
hope that the human race will not discover how to use this energy, he
says, until it has brains and morality enough to use it properly,
because if the discovery is made by the wrong people this planet would
be unsafe.  A force utterly disproportionate to the present source of
Power would be placed at the disposal Or the world.

NOTE (By the Editor in 1920)--This article was published more than two
months after the revelation above was received, but is another striking
confirmation of the truth of these revelations.

[3] In the February issue of the "Electrical Experimenter," (1920)
which was published about a month after this information was received
by revelation, the following article appeared--another startling
confirmation of the truth contained herein, and points to the
possibility that whatever is possible on one planet, is also possible
on another, depending upon that planet's type of civilization and real
knowledge, not superficial theory:

"Recently a cable dispatch from Rome brought the announcement that
Prof. Maiorana discovered that lead balls swimming on a pool of mercury
lost a certain amount of weight.  It was explained that the weight was
lost due to a screening effect which the mercury produced on the lead
balls.  In other words, mercury acts as a sort of insulator against the
earth's gravitational waves.  For gravitation certainly is propagated
the same as other forms of energy, i.e., in wave form.  Prof. T. J.
See, famous investigator of Mare Island, California, in an address
before the California Academy of Sciences, announced recently that his
researches on gravitation in 1917 and his latest researches on
molecular forces confirmed Maiorana's claim that the screening of
gravitation has been shown to exist.  In 1917, says Professor See, 'I
explained the fluctuation of the Moon's main motion by the circular
refraction of the sun's gravitation waves, as they are propagated
through the solid body of our earth at the time of lunar eclipses.'

"'I found also from dealings with capillary forces that quicksilver is
indeed very resistant to the waves which produce molecular action, and
this developed a new theory of the depression of the mercury in
capillary tubes.  This would tend to confirm Maiorana's claim that a
basin of mercury beneath a suspended mass of lead may decrease the
gravitation of the lead by a small amount.  My researches on ether show
conclusively that gravitation is due to waves in the ether, and certain
very resistant bodies in the line of action may thus introduce a slight
screening effect.'

"This reasoning opens up new avenues of thought of what may be
accomplished in the future when we have found a perfect screen against
gravitation."



CHAPTER XII.

EDUCATION AND TRAINING OF THE INDIVIDUAL, VOCATIONAL DETERMINATION,
SCHOOL AGE, MARRIAGE AND SCIENCE (Continued)

Everyone goes to school until the age of 16, that is, the length of
time on Mars would correspond to 32 years on your Earth.  The Martian
year is nearly twice as long as on your globe.

There are many universities on Mars where students enter direct from
their homes, where the primary and preparatory education is first
inculcated in their minds.  Wonderful teachers have charge of the
students, and many truths not yet known on your Earth are taught.
Special and particular attention is given to the subject of the
development of Spiritual gifts to the end that all may come into man's
Divine Heritage, the PEACE, POWER AND PLENTY of the KINGDOM OF GOD.

Each student is selected for his or her proper vocation, and this
vocation is determined scientifically and accurately, for what benefits
the individual also benefits the entire community.

Each individual is trained to perform his part in a manner that will
ensure the unity and harmony of the entire industrial system of the
planet, and each unit understands the dignity and importance of his
position, no matter what that position may be, for on Mars no activity
of human endeavor is considered menial; no one position in life is less
important than the rest: all is God's work.

And so each gravitates to his special liking in the realm of physical
activity, for God has created each individual for some particular work.
Six hours is a day's work, the remainder of the time is devoted to
recreation, music, lectures, and those general activities that best
develop the highest spiritualities with the individual.  For the
Martians realize that life on the material plane is but temporary the
isolation of the individual Divine Spark from the Infinite whole to the
end that the personality may become for all Eternity self-conscious and
in harmony with God, which means the inheritance of God's Kingdom for
all time.

Failure to come into harmony with God is destruction of the
individuality, but not of the Divine in man, for that is
indestructible: it always was and always will be.

Education on Mars is inculcated with a view principally of developing
the individual spiritually in order to prepare one for the spiritual
progress after the completion of the material probationary period as
well as having life in greatest abundance during that period, and with
this main end in view the subject of marriage, the rearing of children,
receives special consideration and attention.

The pivotal idea is that when the time for mating arrives the selection
of a wife by the prospective husband must be in accordance with true
conjugal harmony, and this is not possible in the absence of Spiritual
development.  Hence, divorces are unknown with us, and to that end is
special care taken in the matter of teaching the truth concerning the
marital relation, the rearing of children and their Spiritual growth.

The marriage age for both sexes is about 35 years, in terms of your
time measurements.  The result of this early training is that the young
couple just embarked on the "Sea of Matrimony," are true mates and go
through life without the usual occurrence of domestic turmoil so
characteristic of your Earth's people.

Marriage on your Earth, with but few exceptions, has degenerated from
God's holiest of institutions to a happy convenience for the
gratification of the animal passions; and the rearing of children is an
accident rather than a preconceived reality.  Such marriages are unholy
and destructive, and unless your people respond to a Spiritual
awakening such as God's workers are now trying to inaugurate on your
Earth the growing degeneracy will be augmented rather than diminished
and the extinction of the race will be inevitable.

The curriculum of our schools embraces all branches of Domestic
Science, as well as all the sciences, with the difference from your
system that Spiritual development must be the principal task of those
having supervision over the studies of the young.

One of the subdivisions of Domestic Science receiving particular
attention on Mars is the PREPARATION OF FOODS.  With an atmospheric
pressure of only eight pounds to the square inch, water boils at 175
degrees on our planet.  This temperature is inadequate for cooking
foods properly, especially the coarser varieties.  But recourse is had
to the cooking of food in vacuum or under pressure, as the exigencies
of the occasion demand.

Electrical energy is used most generally for producing heat, and the
variety of foods, both animal and vegetal, are as extensive as on your
planet, for the flora and fauna of Mars differs little from yours.

Martians are not excessive eaters, as their bodies do not require the
gross foods so characteristic of your Earth.  There are two reasons for
this.  In the first place the difference in the gravitational pull on
Mars being thirty-eight one-hundredths to that of your Earth, obviates
the necessity of supplying as much fuel to the human body as your
physical make-up demands.  In the second place the Martians partake of
food to keep the body alive, and not for the vulgar pleasure afforded
by the consumption of victuals.  We eat to live: whereas most of your
Earth tenants live to eat.

Although each individual has his particular place in the universe where
he will excel in some kind of activity, there being no two persons in
all Creation exactly alike, the student on Mars is given an opportunity
to obtain a broad and comprehensive knowledge relating to all subjects,
both material and spiritual.

The study of matter, divided as it is into a number of elements, offers
an interesting field for study and research work, as does also its
concomitant Cosmic Energy.

Compared to your Earth, industry on Mars, by the aid of labor-saving
devices is perfect: and as a consequence the use of energy is
considerable, especially so in the realm of Synthetic Chemistry.  But
it must be understood that the individual is taught that dependence
must be placed rather on one's own dexterity, born of that God-given
faculty of Intuition, than on the perfectness of a man-made machine,
the creation of finite mind.

For it has so happened to races on other planets that complete
degeneration and final extinction has come about by the entire
dependence of the individual and afterwards of the entire race, on
machinery to do the work required of the individual by the Creator,
such dependence finally terminating in almost complete atrophy of the
worker's intuitional faculties.

This calamity will surely overtake your future generations if a halt is
not called on the over-zealous adoption of automatic machines for most
every line of industrial activity.  You are now getting to the stage
where the most simple and elementary mathematical problems are solved
by merely pressing a few buttons or turning a crank, the operator
understanding little or nothing of the fundamentals underlying the
solution of the problems in hand.  This means, in the near future,
brain atrophy through disuse.

And so with other lines of industrial activity.  Not one among a
thousand workers engaged in making shoes can do other than make a heel
or perform some simple operation, one of hundreds of units in the
completion of a pair of shoes.  And perhaps it would be impossible to
find one individual whose intuitional faculties were developed to the
extent that he could turn out the perfect, completed article.

In order to explain how far we have succeeded on Mars in harnessing a
mighty universal force to the end of utilizing the same in turning our
factory wheels, lighting our domiciles and giving warmth to our homes
in winter, it might not be amiss to state a few facts concerning our
knowledge of matter and energy.

We have learned that material life simply amounts to functioning in an
Effect world.  The Cause world is the Reality which is invisible to all
while hampered with a physical body; that all forms of matter are but
the manifestation of the same ultimate Essence; that this Essence is
but a Divine Impulse--a thrust, as it were, in the Ether.  That
although we observe with our sensory organs many different kinds of
matter, consisting of elements and compounds of elements: if we were
able to resolve any of the different forms of matter before us into
their ultimate units, these ultimate particles would all turn out to be
the same thing, the "Divine Impulses" just mentioned.

Now you can best grasp the idea by imagining yourselves immersed in an
Infinite sea of such Divine Impulses, just as a fish is immersed in an
ocean of water.  Everywhere, all about us, is a teeming maelstrom of
motion.  There is not a cubic centimeter of space that you can call at
rest.  All is eternal motion.  All is Energy.

And out of this inexhaustible Cosmic Reservoir do we Martians draw our
energy.  And as the Divine Impulse is the ultimate essence of all
matter and all energy, therefore you might imagine matter in its
different aspects as Electrical in origin.  As Electricity is a
manifestation of the Divine Impulse, then the only Reality in the
Universe is GOD.

We have learned to utilize this Cosmic Energy by getting into harmony
with its origin--GOD--for only through God can true knowledge be
obtained.

On your Earth you have devised a very crude method for utilizing
Electrical Energy.  You expend more energy by burning coal or using
water power than you derive from your electrical pump: for a dynamo is
nothing more than a pump.  Your machines do not generate electrical
power for, as stated before you are immersed in an Infinite sea of
energy.

On Mars we have learned to draw directly on this Infinite reservoir of
energy.  We have learned the law as you some day must.

Located at convenient points on our planet are high towers, capped with
suitable receiving apparatus.  In turn this energy is transmitted to
different parts of our globe where it is used.  We do not require wires
to transmit energy.  Our landscape is neither disfigured with unsightly
wires, nor is it covered with a pall of black smoke.  We devised a more
perfect method of power production and transmission.

The relativity of time, space, motion and matter is an actuality
brought to the attention of advanced students on Mars.  An
understanding of this truth exemplifies the unreality of the world of
gross matter and the importance of gaining knowledge concerning
Spiritual truths; for the latter are the only real tangible treasures
worthy of one's efforts in their acquisition. Already a knowledge of
these truths is beginning to be sought for by some of the more
spiritually enlightened inhabitants of your Earth; but so immersed in
the unreal things of life is the vast majority of your Earth people
that it will take a long time before the present seed-sowing toward
this end will bear fruit.

The seed-sowing referred to is the work of enlightenment now going on
by a mighty group of Spiritual intelligences who, at the present day,
have in hand the task of Spiritual reformation on your Earth.  Only
Truth can stand in the end.  All that is unreal or false must
ultimately give way to truth, and Omniscience has willed that the day
when error shall be no more shall be hastened.

There are other planes of existence for the Spirit: many of them.

But they are simply extensions beyond your limited vision; for as long
as you function in a world of unreality and error your Spiritual vision
is incapable of discerning what lies beyond your present horizon, and
must remain dormant.  Material eyes are but the windows of the Soul,
and your environment has so beclouded your vision that you grasp but
little of the real things beyond.



CHAPTER XIII.

MUSIC AN EXPRESSION OF THE FATHER

All material expressions of the Father, from the simplest chemical
element to the most complex compound; from the one-celled protoplasmic
life germ to the most complex organism, are Vibratory in their ultimate
nature.

As has been stated elsewhere in this book, material life is the
vibratory reflection from the Cause world into an Effect world. The
universe is a vibratory expression of an absolute Reality--GOD: a
material expression of Divine Harmony.  And as Harmony is an expression
of the Father, its antithesis, Discord, is the creation of man.

Of all the vibrations that more fully express the Father and arouse the
Emotional within the soul, Music must of necessity head the list.

Owing to man's degeneration or fall, on your Earth, he has lost all
receptibility to the more refined vibratory tones of the chromatic
scale.

And for the same reason he has lost receptibility to intermediate
vibrations in the COLOR spectrum, which has clouded or stultified his
visional faculties.  The long waves of the Infra-red and the short
waves of the Ultra-violet ends of the spectrum are invisible to your
Earth people except in rare cases of developed mediumship, though your
photograph plates are somewhat sensitive to these vibrations.

You are immersed in commercialism and other selfish pursuits while all
around you is a beautiful RAINBOW UNIVERSE, vibrating with music too
heavenly for your dulled perceptions to enjoy.

On Mars the development of the Musical talent is held to be of primary
importance.  The laws of Harmony are part of the curriculum of all
schools, and all necessary paraphernalia for its proper exposition are
provided.  We have instruments for measuring tone vibrations of so
delicate a pitch that the existence of these tones would be a blank to
the gross material ears of the inhabitants of your world.

Music arouses the innermost emotions of the soul and its effect on the
individual is proportionate to his degree of spiritual development.
Music is harmony, but it also creates an atmosphere of harmony.

The music of the spheres is a living reality, for Harmony is the very
essence of the Cosmos.  By Music of the Spheres is meant the harmonious
interrelation of all spiritual planes.  Every unit in the universe is
in perfect accord one with the other, and all are functioning in
perfect unison.  Every Solar Orb and every Planet responds to
Harmonious law.  The Cosmos as a whole is the expression of a Divine
Symphony.

When man's spiritual progress has attained a degree of enfoldment
entitling him to come into possession of his Divine Heritage then will
the sublime vibrations of the spheres be a reality to him.

On Mars divers instruments are used for producing musical harmony, and
much of this harmony is of such a subtle nature that your crude
instruments could not give expression to it.

We have a means of producing harmony of the highest order by utilizing
Ethereal Electric Vibration which produces light vibrations
corresponding to tone production, for true Electric Vibration is real
music.  This device resembles a series of globes, all transparent,
colorless when not in action.  But immediately they are allowed to
produce music they become units of color and tone work that would give
you the impression of SEEING AND HEARING A RAINBOW SIMULTANEOUSLY.  You
are not ready to receive the scientific explanation of this phenomenon,
but we are ready to give it to you at any time.

Singing is also highly developed on our planet, for it is the first
expression of harmony that the child is taught.  This is true for the
reason that vocal music is the most natural expression of harmonious
vibrations.  Much time is devoted to ensemble work among our people of
all ages.  This chorus work is of great benefit to all partaking, for
individually and collectively much inspiration is received; and the
tremendous Love-force loosened by this united expression of harmony
becomes a phenomenal power and stimulus--a purifying agent for soul and
body.  This will help you to realize why disease is unknown to us.

In the development of the musical talents of the individual on Mars the
pupil is impressed with the necessity of expressing the true self, and
the original improvisation or composition is the method by which the
pupil expresses his understanding of the subject.  No one attempts to
ape the technique or genius of another, for on Mars all are geniuses.
This is true in every form of activity.  All must be creators to
express individuality.

When an individual on Mars has surpassed all others in some special
expression of Divine Harmony the product of his genius is for the
benefit of all, hence copyrights and patents are unknown on our planet.



CHAPTER XIV

AERONAUTICS, INHABITED PLANETS, SECTARIANISM

A great deal of interest is being manifested in your city this morning
(April 25, 1920), over the Aeronautical Show.  You imagine the Flying
machines wonderful mechanisms; but in their present state they will not
lift you out of your atmosphere.  You have yet to perfect a real
airship.

Your Flying machines are cumbersome and awkward, and they consume lots
of fuel and make a deal of noise.  It can hardly be said they are
harmonious with the music of the spheres, but then it is only a sample
of your Earth's development.

You have seen the seagulls soar over the water seemingly without
motion; and yet they go up and down, turning this way and that without
effort.  This is the best idea I can give you of our airships, which
really soar.  No sound, no discordant vibrations disturb the quiet of
the Martian atmosphere, and the tranquility of the Mars people.

When you have learned the secret of how to tap the Universal Reservoir
of Cosmic Power, then will you evolve a perfect Flying machine such as
we have.  A great deal of interest is also being centered on an attempt
to signal Mars, and your apparatus is not fine enough to receive our
waves.  But success will come to you in another decade, and we will be
able to get something through for your scientific world.

It is gratifying to know that a large portion of your population
entertain the belief that Mars is inhabited: and also that the
possibilities point to the fact that other planets are inhabited.

You have advanced a long way to come to that belief, but you are yet a
long way from the truth.  You are on the eve of an awakening and much
will come through the discoveries of scientists who are devoting their
lives to the study of Truth. It is true that only a few of that number
are bold enough to proclaim all they discover, and they must bear the
brunt of much harsh criticism.  In the end, however, ignorance must
give way to Light.

We look upon your inventions with much amusement, and yet with great
interest, just as you would look upon your children's finest toys.  We
are much older than you and are doing all we can to help your
scientists by impressing them with thoughts that will lead them to
discover new truths, and our interest never flags.  How could it if we
are doing the Father's work? For it is the Father's great pleasure to
give His children all they can receive.

If you could cut loose from your world conventions and could perceive
new ideas; if you would but disregard man-made theories and open your
minds and souls to the Father's Revelations, it would not be long
before your sin-cursed and forsaken Earth would be changed into a
Paradise.

But the tendency among you if to think as your forefathers thought
rather than cut new paths.  However, your children of this generation
are of a different sort, and they must be taught the importance of
DEVELOPING THE SPIRITUAL INTELLECT.  There is MORE INDIVIDUALISM being
born into the world today than ever before.  THERE ARE FEWER CHILDREN,
BUT THEY ARE STRONGER (the year 1920).

THESE CHILDREN, WITH THEIR ORIGINALITY AND ESOTERIC TENDENCIES WILL
BRING ON A REVOLUTION ON YOUR PLANET THAT WILL END BY DESTROYING YOUR
THREADBARE DOGMATISM.  This tendency is evidenced by the recent failure
of the Interchurch movement.  It has been the habit on your planet that
you cannot accomplish anything without raising immense sums of money.

It is not money that does the real work but rather PERSONAL SERVICE.
People are inclined to give almost everything than personal service.
If each person lived the Christ Life there would be no need of money.
A close study of the Mars Economic system will demonstrate that truth.



CHAPTER XV.

LIFE AN ATTRIBUTE OF THE ENTIRE UNIVERSE.

THE PLANET JUPITER

LIFE IS AN ATTRIBUTE OF THE ENTIRE UNIVERSE.  Go forth on a moonless
night and behold the firmament emblazoned with its myriad of
scintillating stars, solar orbs, nebulae, world-systems in the making:
the galactic circle, a jeweled band athwart the canopy of Heaven; a
seething maelstrom of Light: countless suns in space all expressing the
one reality, OMNISCIENCE.

Only presumptuous man can question the Divine Intent in the creation of
the Infinite number of giant suns, stupendous worldwide systems, and
place his particular world-unit at the center of the Cosmos.

Man contemplates this handiwork of God as a mere adjunct (more
ornamental than useful) to his terrestrial environment, conceitedly
thinking that the Father's only consideration is centered about himself.

As these life-giving orbs are countless in number, their orbits
extending as they do to Infinity in all directions, so is it with the
habitable worlds in space.  Some there are where life is not yet
possible: worlds not yet far removed from their primitive state: not
long since condensed from fire mist: others where life has just begun:
others on whose surfaces live teeming millions of God's creatures, just
as you live and others have lived before you.  And there are other
worlds whose life-cycle has been run; where intelligent life has
ceased: where world-disintegration has set in.  For this is in
accordance with the universal law of Growth and Decay--a law that
exempts neither the one-celled amoeba, nor the complex Solar system
whirling yonder in Infinite space.

For all that comes from the Father into material expression must some
day revert to its primordial state.

You have thus far received much concerning the idealistic conditions on
Mars, whose planetary career is now reaching the zenith of its Cosmic
cycle, and whose denizens have progressed to a degree of Divine
unfoldment not yet attained by many worlds.

It is necessary that you now receive some information relating to one
of the less-advanced planets belonging to the family of our sun, in
order you may be able to learn by contrast something of the wonders of
God's work.

JUPITER, owing to its prodigious size, being nearly eleven times larger
than your Earth, but whose density is proportionately less, might well
be styled the Master Planet of our system.

Jupiter is well blessed with satellites, having eight, a description of
which is not necessary at this time.  This planet is in what might be
styled its primary evolutionary stage where life has just begun.  This
life has not evolved beyond the unicellular, or amoebic stage; and it
will be only after the lapse of a long period of time, measured in
Geological units, when more complex organisms will appear: and many of
these periods will come and go before this planet's surface will have
attained a proper development for the propagation of intelligences
capable of being classed with the denizens of your Earth.

Long before that age arrives Jupiter's surface and atmosphere will
undergo a tremendous change.  Mighty planetary cataclysms will raise
new mountain ranges; new continents will appear, and the present land
surfaces on this planet will sink, to be covered with slime and water,
to rise again in the centuries to come, for the Father's love and
solicitude will provide, as it has in the case of all His Celestial
Creations, a bountiful supply of stored-up radiant energy, such as coal
and petroleum, and other elements, for the comfort of those who will
inhabit this giant among the worlds of this system in time to come.

Jupiter still retains much of its internal heat, which gives this
planet a very high mean temperature.  Its atmosphere is still very
dense, and owing to the very rapid evaporation of water due to the
extreme heat a constant cloud canopy covers its surface, which only
dissipates occasionally in a slight degree, at which times only the sun
penetrates to the surface of the globe.  By reason of the constant
thick cloud canopy over the surface of Jupiter the planet is enveloped
in deep gloom and darkness.  As radiation is arrested to a marked
degree by the clouds and atmosphere the temperature is very humid as
well as hot.  In this steam environment grow forests of fern and
fungus-like trees and rank vegetal growths which will in the course of
time be preserved as coal for the races destined to inhabit this
planet. This vegetal growth is a flora that knows not bloom or seed,
but is propagated by root and spores, a flora most primitive in type,
but which will in time evolve through the law of mutation and
adaptation into a diversified and useful vegetal kingdom for the races
yet to come on the planet.

Owing to the tremendous gravitational pull on Jupiter present organisms
are, and future ones will be evolved along specially modified lines, in
order that they may encompass the least possible volume, just as the
denizens of the extreme depths of your oceans have evolved.  The
modification is necessary that organisms mat be able to function on a
planet where the difference in gravity is as one to three compared with
your Earth.  In other words a minimum density is necessary to produce
maximum lightness.

As there is no lesser or greater in the economy of Nature (Nature is
God Manifest), the most infinitesimal mote in the universe is as
perfect within itself  as is the most gigantic sun.  Size is but
relative.  The anatomy of the midget is as perfect and complex as is
that of the mammoth, and so there exist in the universe inhabited
worlds that are relatively very small.

Circulating around the sun in orbits between Mars and Jupiter are
numerous small planets or asteroids.  One in particular, which is known
to your astronomers as Vesta, is encompassed by an atmosphere and is
inhabited by diminutive people and a correspondingly diminutive fauna
and flora.  The diameter of Vesta is about 500 miles, although your
astronomers give its size, erroneously, as much smaller.

While the subject of these discourses is mainly Spiritual you are
getting many scientific facts, and although not a volume of them you
are getting a proper understanding of the Cosmos.

The universe with all its suns and planets is analogous to a perfect
watch.  Each sun and planet moves over a prescribed orbit in a given
time mathematically proportional to the movements of all the other
celestial bodies, just as the geared wheels of the watch conform to
their prescribed movements.  The celestial bodies are seemingly
actuated by invisible gears and are held rigidly in their proper places
by a mighty force whose power is incalculable.  This is evidenced by
the fact that all celestial bodies conform to that inexorable law,
Divine Harmony.

That all planets describe equal areas in the same time in their
ceaseless journeyings, and that the square of the time of their periods
is as the cube of their distance from their common centers, is an
exemplification of the reign of God's harmonious laws.

You must remember that Empirical knowledge is but a perverted view of
Truth.  All the fleeting things of life are but dross: their apparent
reality an illusion.  Material life is but a projection from the Cause
world into the Effect world.  Man is but a reflection of a reality that
transcends his material vision.

You are on the threshold of a great awakening on your planet, which is
yet in great darkness, but the dawn of a better day is nigh.  Christ is
coming into His Kingdom, which must be in the hearts of the people.
His Second Coming means that He will come into your lives with the
Power of the Spirit.  This can only become possible through an awakened
understanding of Spiritual laws.  Although man on your Earth is in
great darkness it is not the darkness of Jupiter, which planet must
undergo many changes before it reaches your evolutionary stage.

COMMUNICATION BETWEEN PLANETS in our system and your Earth will be
realized in a short time, and the INITIAL MESSAGE WILL BE FROM MARS.
This event will herald A NEW ERA for the people of your Earth, for it
will be an important factor in the BREAKING DOWN OF THE MEDIEVAL
DOGMATISM of the past, A NARROW-MINDED THEOLOGY built upon a perverted
corruption of God's limitless universe: a universe narrowed down to
your Earth and the inhabitants thereof.

Man's presumptuousness and sophistry is in direct ratio to his
ignorance, and that is one reason why materialism holds sway among a
majority of your so-called learned scientists and the people generally.
But the materialism of the masses is not so degenerating and
destructive as the impossible dogmas entertained by your numerous sects
WHO HAVE MADE GOD, WHO IS INFINITE LOVE, AN ANTHROPOMORPHIC MONSTER.
These dogmas are priestly inventions created to frighten God's
children; to make of man, created after the image of God a crawling,
servile creature, instead of what he really should be, the highest
manifestation of the Divine, the culmination of God's handiwork.



CHAPTER XVI

THE RISEN CHRIST

Easter Sunday, April 4, 1920

Your Earth's inhabitants are celebrating today the Resurrection of your
Savior--by gratifying the desires of Self.

We of Mars do not have such events to commemorate for we never
crucified Him.  We opened the door to His wonderful Truth.

Not one of your Earth's inhabitants can perform the miracles Christ
did, but we can.  Our leaders, who are our advisers, guides and
Spiritual teachers are Christlike men who can do all the works that
Christ and His disciples did.  He said.  "These signs do follow them
that believe," and we have never stopped believing.

Your condition is pitiful.  There is nothing but darkness between you
and the Truth Christ tried to give you.  Christ is only an idea on your
planet and not a reality in the hearts of your people.  Their whole
thought, for weeks past, has been devoted to their personal adornment,
and in preparing festivals for this occasion.

In your churches, where they seem to observe the period of Christ's
suffering, it is only a form.  They go through their vain repetition of
prayers, that have no soul in them, and your six weeks of so-called
Lent is only a mockery of its real significance.

If you would live the Christ life you would not crucify Him daily in
the flesh, but would come to that consciousness that He is risen in
your soul.  You are continually crucifying Christ all over your planet
in the same way that you crucified Jesus Christ, for you either deny
Him or pervert His Truth to suit your selfishness.

All of the people on Mars have lived on other planets before, except
your Earth.  The Earth has not advanced enough to be placed in the line
of progression yet.  However, the time is near when you will experience
that progression.  It will be after you are high enough spiritually to
receive word from the Martians through mediums.  This work evidences
the fact that you are beginning that experience now.  Take hope, for
after the obscure darkness must come the dawn.  Your whole Earth is now
in terrible travail, but the result will be the birth of the new Christ
Spirit.

You get glimpses now and then of the real Christ Life, but do you, or
can you realize what life on a planet is like when all the inhabitants
live the Christ Life every day? That is why we have the wonderful
manifestations of the Father's Love in our intricate and delicate
mechanisms, and in our utilization of Cosmic Energy.  It is thus that
we receive the Father's wondrous gifts.  But Mars never became what it
is until God purified it by His Son's example, and we accepted Him as
our Savior WITHOUT MURDER.  Your planet damned itself to many bloody
aeons by the rejection of Him, and your Religion has been blood, blood,
blood! In your last five years you have been given enough blood to
drown all the martyrs you have given to your bloody god.

Your planet is in slavery.  You are slaves to your conventionalities.
They are like shackles on your souls: like bands of iron.  And yet you
cling to them until it seems you do not want freedom.

It is only Truth that will free you; and as long as you cling to false
ideals and sham systems you must expect to be slaves.

Pin your faith not in material money, but in Spiritual Wealth. "Take no
heed of the morrow."  Be of good cheer.  MAKE WIDE THE OPENING TO THE
SPIRIT! HE WILL ENTER!



CHAPTER XVII.

PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT THE RESULT OF SPIRITUAL CAUSES

  "For they have sown the wind
  and they shall reap the whirlwind." (Hosea, 8:7)

The Creator and Dominator of the entire Universe is DIVINE MENTALITY.

The only real actuality that confronts sentient beings is MIND. We are
born, live and have our being amidst physical surroundings that in
final analysis are mere illusions.  This idea is not new.

It forms the base of most systems of philosophy from the dawn of
civilization to the present day.

Our physical environment is the result of our mental attitude. Mars is
blessed with a climatic tranquility that would surpass the
understanding of an Earth dweller.  But this was not always so.

In proportion to the spiritual unfoldment of the inhabitants of a
planet so is the degree of climatic tranquility enjoyed by them. This
may, at first reading, appear far-fetched, but it is true nevertheless.

Those who live on a material plane are immersed in the Effect world.
The dominating and primary influence that gives rise to all material
phenomena have their inception in the Cause world--the world of Spirit.
Hence the turbulence of the elements originate, through the law of
Vibration, deep down in the mentalities of those who make up the
population of a planet. Cloudbursts, severe wind storms and other
disturbances of Nature are all adjuncts of the spirit of war and rapine.

When a race has discarded the pursuit of false ideals and comes into
harmony with the Father then there occurs a corresponding change in its
physical environment by reason of the vibratory influences at work.
These influences have their inception in the mentalities of sentient
beings who are doing the Father's work in the advancement of the races
of men throughout the entire physical universe.

This same vibratory law is at work throughout all physical planes, and
a knowledge of this law was referred to by Christ when He said: "THE
KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU."

On Mars, owing to the high spiritual state of its inhabitants, who are
in harmony with their Creator, climatic conditions are, compared with
your world, most perfect.  However, there was a time, measured in terms
of your millions of years, when the elements on Mars were as agitated
and capricious as they are today on your blood-stained globe.  That was
before man on Mars had enfolded spiritually.

As the Martians progressed and unfolded spiritually there occurred a
subsidence in the roughness of the elements: and today our planet is
blessed with a tranquility proportionate to the high Mental state of
its inhabitants.



CHAPTER XVIII.

MATERIAL LIFE A LESSON

At the expense of what may appear as painful reiteration it is my
desire to impress upon the readers of this book this Truth: Material
life is necessary to unfold character, to develop the real self, the
Divine part in man: the only principle that endures forever.

There is a lesson in every phase of work, in every joy, in every
sorrow.  That lesson is LOVE.  Until you have fully realized this truth
you will not become full heirs in the Kingdom of God.  "He that loveth
is born of God."

Christ taught that the Kingdom was not of your Earth, and that all
material things are transitory and would ultimately vanish like mist.

The story of Mars is a lesson to you as to what may be accomplished
towards a more harmonious relation with the Father: towards a truer
realization of God's real Kingdom.  But in any event you should not
idolize the Mars people, for the Father's Kingdom is more perfect.
Mars' idealism is only a degree in the progress in the Cosmic Family of
worlds.  The soul must really strive for a higher goal.

The Martians, after ages of time, have mastered their natural passions
in suppressing self, but they have other heights to scale.  But he who
conquers a sordid environment; he who rises from a black pool of
iniquity; he who finds the Father's Kingdom amidst an uncompromising
warfare with sin deserves more credit than he who is favored by
circumstances of birth with more congenial surroundings and a higher
Spiritual environment.

You must remember that the individual on Mars, although living amidst
an idealism, is beset with problems of life also.  Our problems are
more subtle and of a very different character than you are accustomed
to deal with.  Every plane of life has its complexities.  If this were
not so, the stimulus for growth would be weak indeed.  Your most
apparent problems are material only to your understanding, since you
are living under a most pernicious social and economic system, a system
which puts a premium on selfishness.

All sentient entities are functioning in a universe of Relativity, and
the perfectness of the Martian character and the ideal material and
spiritual aspects of the planet are so by comparison only.

Martians are self-conscious of their shortcomings and aspire to higher
things in God's Kingdom, for progress is eternal and the ultimate goal
is never reached on the material plane of action, for the pinnacle of
all progress is God.  "BE YE PERFECT, EVEN AS YOUR FATHER IN HEAVEN IS
ALSO PERFECT."



CHAPTER XIX.

A MARTIAN HOME

The HOME is the moulder of Character in the individual, and in most
cases the Home influences determine the future of the man.

Home influences are the most lasting and abide by the individual unto
the end of his material career.

All the habitations of the people of Mars are beautiful, and a brief
description of one will give our reader an understanding of the other
millions of homes on the planet.

I will take you into a Martian home in the city of Urid the Beautiful.
The rooms are large and commodious.  Sunlight, which has been filtered
through translucent glass to temper and rob it of its glare, floods
every room.

There are no stairs to climb, for the five or six rooms--depending on
the size of the family--form a rectangle with a court in the center.
There is a fountain in the center of the court, and beautiful flowers
grow in profusion.  Birds of vivid plumage fill the air with their song.

In one of the large rooms a mother sits at a sewing machine making a
garment.  For the Martians use these machines too, although they are a
great improvement on yours.  Not all the clothing is made in the homes,
but much of it is, and this is easily understood when you recall that
the Martians are true artists and possessed of great originality.

The mother's attention is now and then centered on a very small child
who sits on a velvety carpet.  This carpet would be a most wonderful
acquisition in the home of a man of wealth on your Earth.  It has a
soft, fluffy pile two inches thick, and makes a most comfortable floor
for the baby to play upon.  This baby is about 18 months old, and plays
with toys just as your Earth babies do.

A beautiful young girl enters the room.  She is dressed in a simple
becoming gown of white, and she carries her school books with her.
After removing her hat and putting her books away she begins to tell
her mother of the wonderful things learned at school that day.  She is
studying the Harmony of Music, particularly the relationship between
Electro-Magnetic Vibrations and Music.

The mother shows much interest, and from her store of knowledge clears
up many doubtful points in the mind of her daughter.  And so the hours
pass quickly until the father comes home and joins the family circle.

The walls of the room are white, and are relieved here and there by the
most beautiful tapestries.  The few furnishings of the room express
beauty through the artistry that is born of Love.

There is a lack of useless furniture and bric-a-brac in the room.

A table, a few chairs and a receptacle for books, also a couch,
complete the furnishings.  But this simplicity in the matter of
furniture adds a spirit of freedom to the home.

There is no kitchen drudgery in store for the Housewife.  The family
repair to a dining-room where food is served by the mother.  The food
has just arrived from a central depot in a mechanical contrivance which
runs underground.  After the meal has been partaken of, the soiled
dishes are returned in the same manner by which they were conveyed to
the home.

Later in the evening the family prepares to attend a lecture or musical
concert nearby.  Or perhaps a visit to some distant part is considered,
in which case an airship is ordered from a public aerodrome.



CHAPTER XX.

ART

As Harmony is an expression of the Father, its coexistent, Art, is an
expression of the laws of Rhythm through the individual when
permanently registered in a material way.

The more a created object conforms to the laws of Harmony the more
pleasing it is to the eye.

The artist gives expression to his soul within with paint brush, chisel
or loom, and the quality of his production is proportionate to the
development of his spiritual nature.

All of God's creatures are artists, although only a small percentage of
His evolutionary creatures are able to express materially what lies
hidden in the soul.  Hence, a beautifully executed painting, statue or
tapestry appeals to and interests almost everyone, even though few are
able to execute their own artistic impressions.

The reason for this is that the average physical makeup is defective
and therefore affords a poor vehicle for the expression of the real
entity.  Then again, artistic ability is a question of individual
development.

Primordial man's efforts to depict that which delighted his soul were
crude indeed, compared with the creations of your world's foremost
artists today.  But in a relative sense only, for the state of your art
is as far behind the art of the Martians as are the carvings of your
prehistoric cavemen behind the productions of your Michael Angelos.  As
man unfolds spiritually there is a corresponding advance in his
artistic point of view.

This is evidenced by the fact that art has flourished more on your
Earth among those races and individuals who are spiritually inclined.
The products of the monastery and cloister in the Middle Ages are
witness to this fact.

Amongst a materially inclined people whose selfish instincts have
stultified their souls; a people whose ultimate goal is the acquisition
of material things; a people whose only ambition is to satisfy self: a
people whose ideas of real happiness are the pursuit of material
pleasures, art has little place except as a fad.

This is the condition today in many parts of your world, and especially
so on your Western continent.  Prize fights and the sensualities of the
stage interest many more people than do Art galleries and the beauties
of Nature.

The fact that God is the Supreme Artist of the Universe can be
established not only with the microscope, but with one's natural eyes.
Divine Art is expressed in every atom comprising the universe; and poor
indeed is he in Spiritual gifts who fails to feast his eyes on God's
handiwork.

As Art is an expression of God's law of Harmony it can be said that its
development on Mars has been a stimulus to the development of every
line of planetary activity and enters into every phase of Martian
social and industrial system.

As every one of God's creatures is an artist in the making, every
Martian is a developed artist.  Hence, every product of the loom or
forge on our planet is an artistic production, and reflects in a
material way the soul of the creator.

The incentive before the Martian is to work for the pleasure of
working, which in ultimate analysis is God's work.  Of course such a
system of industrial activity would be impossible among a partially
developed people.

Art on Mars typifies man's spiritual and material progress on this
planet.  This planet's past history and present achievements are woven
into the products of the looms.  The warp and woof of our beautiful
tapestries, so much in evidence in every home, express the Spirituality
of the Martian people; as do also the creations of the Martian
sculptors, and the works of those who use brush and paint.

Some of the most beautiful productions of Mars art in painting,
sculpture or tapestry depict the scenes and various episodes incident
to Christ's visit to Mars 10,000 years ago.  They show many wonderful
works of the Master, but we do not call them Miracles for, as later art
shows, the leaders of Martian spiritual attainment were and are true
disciples and do also the works of the Master.

Mars' past has been one of achievement spiritually, and naturally in a
material way also, so when the Martian artist weaves the story of the
past in his loom there are no misgivings, for the Martian past is not
fraught with hate, sin and suffering.



CHAPTER XXI.

SCIENTIFIC SOPHISTRY

   "For we are of yesterday, and know nothing,
   because our days upon Earth are a shadow."
                                    Job 8:9.

The term "Scientific Sophistry" well fits your multitude of theories
concerning Truth.

Science which connotes a higher wisdom of hidden things has degenerated
on your Earth from its original purpose (the overthrow of ignorance and
superstition and the development among intelligent beings of a near
approximation of Ultimate Truth) to an orthodox dogmatism, which today
is on a par with the unreality which this selfsame science has sought
to eliminate from the shallowness of the human mind.

It is quite true that the modern scientific method of investigation:
that is, along the lines of Observation, followed by the formation of a
theory, and finally by demonstration, has resulted in the release of
millions of souls from a darker thraldom than that which now besets
them, but nevertheless, the human race on your planet now undergoing
its probationary experience, is to be pitied for its blindness in
matters of real import, namely SPIRITUAL TRUTHS.

Your scientific methods instead of leading you onward towards the
Central Sun of Spiritual enlightenment has so beclouded your vision
that your race today--that is, the so-called enlightened and learned
portions of your population--have been deflected from the main path,
and they will soon find themselves pursuing an illusionary
will-o'-the-wisp.

Another result of the adoption of the modern scientific method has been
the tendency of those endeavoring to bring light into the dark nooks
and crannies of human existence, to immerse themselves in an abysmal
materialism from which rescue is almost hopeless.

This condition is the result of a loss of Spiritual vision, and is the
final effort on the part of scientists to explain the riddle of human
existence in accordance with a cleverly thought out, but most amazingly
deficient, mechanistic conception of life.

Since the inception of modern Science on your Earth, based on the
scientific method of investigation, its devotees adopted a spirit of
skepticism concerning all problems of human activity not susceptible to
measurement with the foot-rule, or analysis with the test tube, with
the result that the newer Science of Psychology was invented to supply
a reasonable and material explanation for the subtle and mystifying
phenomena of the human mind.

That the conceivers of this science of Psychology have been successful
is attested by the many remarkable explanations given to account for
everyday manifestations of human and animal mentality.

I will venture to say that this idea applies to all branches of modern
science as there seems to be no class of phenomena in the entire
universe, whether in the realm of chemistry, physics or psychology but
what can be clearly elucidated to the satisfaction of all scientists
with the aid of an adequate terminology.  So, today your Science in
final analysis, has degenerated into a system of clever word-juggling.

It is true there are today in the ranks of your foremost investigators
and God-inspired men who are seeking Truth.  Their names and their
achievements will be treasured by a grateful posterity, and it is to be
regretted that their declarations, based upon tireless investigation
and honest opinion, are derided by their fellow-workers in the Realm of
Truth.

All your scientific theories are based upon certain postulates that in
time are out of agreement with observed facts, and you are compelled to
cast those postulates aside, adopt others and theorize anew.  This
fruitless search for Truth must go on until a divergence is made from
the blind trail and the right path is found that will lead you to the
ultimate goal.

Be not surprised, then, that the revelations in this book will meet
with the usual criticisms launched at every new idea of Truth that has
been given to your world from the time man first walked erect and
beheld the stars in the firmament of God. Error must and will dissolve
presently in the presence of Truth, which will abide with you for all
time.  HELP HASTEN THE DAY OF THE LORD.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Planet Mars and its Inhabitants, by 
Eros Urides and J. L. Kennon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARS AND ITS INHABITANTS ***

***** This file should be named 563.txt or 563.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/563/

Produced by Charles Keller.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
