The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Constitution of Japan, 1946, by Japan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Constitution of Japan, 1946

Author: Japan

Posting Date: July 26, 2008 [EBook #612]
Release Date: August, 1996

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CONSTITUTION OF JAPAN, 1946 ***













                 THE CONSTITUTION OF JAPAN, 1946


Promulgated on November 3, 1946; Put into effect on May 3, 1947.

     We, the Japanese people, acting through our duly elected
representatives in the National Diet, determined that we shall
secure for ourselves and our posterity the fruits of peaceful
cooperation with all nations and the blessings of liberty
throughout this land, and resolved that never again shall we be
visited with the horrors of war through the action of government,
do proclaim that sovereign power resides with the people and do
firmly establish this Constitution. Government is a sacred trust
of the people, the authority for which is derived from the
people, the powers of which are exercised by the representatives
of the people, and the benefits of which are enjoyed by the
people. This is a universal principle of mankind upon which this
Constitution is founded. We reject and revoke all constitutions,
laws, ordinances, and rescripts in conflict herewith.

     We, the Japanese people, desire peace for all time and are
deeply conscious of the high ideals controlling human
relationship, and we have determined to preserve our security and
existence, trusting in the justice and faith of the peace-loving
peoples of the world. We desire to occupy an honored place in an
international society striving for the preservation of peace, and
the banishment of tyranny and slavery, oppression and intolerance
for all time from the earth. We recognize that all peoples of the
world have the right to live in peace, free from fear and want.

     We believe that no nation is responsible to itself alone,
but that laws of political morality are universal; and that
obedience to such laws is incumbent upon all nations who would
sustain their own sovereignty and justify their sovereign
relationship with other nations.

     We, the Japanese people, pledge our national honor to
accomplish these high ideals and purposes with all our resources.



                     CHAPTER I. THE EMPEROR

     Article 1. The Emperor shall be the symbol of the State and
of the unity of the people, deriving his position from the will
of the people with whom resides sovereign power.

     Article 2. The Imperial Throne shall be dynastic and
succeeded to in accordance with the Imperial House law passed by
the Diet.

     Article 3. The advice and approval of the Cabinet shall be
required for all acts of the Emperor in matters of state, and the
Cabinet shall be responsible therefor.

     Article 4. The Emperor shall perform only such acts in
matters of state as are provided for in this Constitution and he
shall not have powers related to government

     (2) The Emperor may delegate the performance of his acts in
matters of state as may be provided by law.

     Article 5. When, in accordance with the Imperial House law,
a Regency is established, the Regent shall perform his acts in
matter of state in the Emperor's name. In this case, paragraph
one of the article will be applicable.

     Article 6. The Emperor shall appoint the Prime Minister as
designated by the Diet.

     (2) The Emperor shall appoint the Chief Judge of the Supreme
Court as designated by the Cabinet.

     Article 7. The Emperor, with the advice and approval of the
Cabinet, shall perform the following acts in makers of state on
behalf of the people:

     (i)  Promulgation of amendments of the constitution, laws,
          cabinet orders and treaties;

     (ii) Convocation of the Diet;

     (iii)     Dissolution of the House of Representatives;

     (iv) Proclamation of general election of members of the
          Diet;

     (v)  Attestation of the appointment and dismissal of
          Ministers of State and other officials as provided for
          by law, and of full powers and credentials of
          Ambassadors and Ministers;

     (vi) Attestation of general and special amnesty, commutation
          of punishment, reprieve, and restoration of rights;

     (vii)     Awarding of honors;

     (viii)    Attestation of instruments of ratification and
               other diplomatic documents as provided for by law;

     (ix) Receiving foreign ambassadors and ministers;

     (x)  Performance of ceremonial functions.

     Article 8. No property can be given to, or received by, the
Imperial House, nor can any gifts be made therefrom, without the
authorization of the Diet.



                 CHAPTER II. RENUNCIATION OF WAR

     Article 9. Aspiring sincerely to an international peace
based on justice and order, the Japanese people forever renounce
war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of
force as a mean of settling international disputes.

     (2) In order to accomplish the aim of the preceding
paragraph, land, sea, and air forces, as well as other war
potential, will never be maintained. The right of belligerency of
the state will not be recognized.



          CHAPTER III. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE PEOPLE

     Article 10. The conditions necessary for being a Japanese
national shall be determined by law.

     Article 11. The people shall not be prevented from enjoying
any of the fundamental human rights. These fundamental human
rights guaranteed to the people by this Constitution shall be
conferred upon the people of this and future generations as
eternal and inviolate rights.

     Article 12. The freedoms and rights guaranteed to the people
by this Constitution shall be maintained by the constant endeavor
of the people, who shall refrain from any abuse of these freedoms
and rights and shall always be responsible for utilizing them for
the public welfare.

     Article 13. All of the people shall be respected as
individuals. Their right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness shall, to the extent that it does not interfere with
the public welfare, be the supreme consideration in legislation
and in other governmental affairs.

     Article 14. All of the people are equal under the law and
there shall be no discrimination in political, economic or social
relations because of race, creed, sex, social status or family
origin.

     (2) Peers and peerage shall not be recognized.

     (3) No privilege shall accompany any award of honor,
decoration or any distinction, nor shall any such award be valid
beyond the lifetime of the individual who now holds or hereafter
may receive it.

     Article 15. The people have the inalienable right to choose
their public officials and to dismiss them.

     (2) All public officials are servants of the whole community
and not of any group thereof.

     (3) Universal adult suffrage is guaranteed with regard to
the election of public officials.

     (4) In all elections, secrecy of the ballot shall not be
violated. A voter shall not be answerable, publicly or privately,
for the choice he has made.

     Article 16. Every person shall have the right of peaceful
petition for the redress of damage, for the removal of public
officials, for the enactment, repeal or amendment of law,
ordinances or regulations and for other matters, nor shall any
person be in any way discriminated against sponsoring such a
petition.

     Article 17. Every person may sue for redress as provided by
law from the State or a public entity, in case he has suffered
damage through illegal act of any public official.

     Article 18. No person shall be held in bondage of any kind.
Involuntary servitude, except as punishment for crime, is
prohibited.

     Article 19. Freedom of thought and conscience shall not be
violated.

     Article 20. Freedom of religion is guaranteed to all. No
religious organization shall receive any privileges from the
State nor exercise any political authority.

     (2) No person shall be compelled to take part in any
religious acts, celebration, rite or practice.

     (3) The state and its organs shall refrain from religious
education or any other religious activity.

     Article 21. Freedom of assembly and association as well as
speech, press and all other forms of expression are guaranteed.

     (2) No censorship shall be maintained, nor shall the secrecy
of any means of communication be violated.

     Article 22. Every person shall have freedom to choose and
change his residence and to choose his occupation to the extent
that it does not interfere with the public welfare.

     (2) Freedom of all persons to move to a foreign country and
to divest themselves of their nationality shall be inviolate.

     Article 23. Academic freedom is guaranteed.

     Article 24. Marriage shall be based only on the mutual
consent of both sexes and it shall be maintained through mutual
cooperation with the equal rights of husband and wife as a basis.

     (2) With regard to choice of spouse, property rights,
inheritance, choice of domicile, divorce and other matters
pertaining to marriage and the family, laws shall be enacted from
the standpoint of individual dignity and the essential equality
of the sexes.

     Article 25. All people shall have the right to maintain the
minimum standards of wholesome and cultured living.

     (2) In all spheres of life, the State shall use its
endeavors for the promotion and extension of social welfare and
security, and of public health.

     Article 26. All people shall have the right to receive an
equal education correspondent to their ability, as provided by
law.

     (2) All people shall be obligated to have all boys and girls
under their protection receive ordinary educations as provided
for by law. Such compulsory education shall be free.

     Article 27. All people shall have the right and the
obligation to work.

     (2) Standards for wages, hours, rest and other working
conditions shall be fixed by law.

     (3) Children shall not be exploited.

     Article 28. The right of workers to organize and to bargain
and act collectively is guaranteed.

     Article 29. The right to own or to hold property is
inviolable.

     (2) Property rights shall be defined by law, in conformity
with the public welfare.

     (3) Private property may be taken for public use upon just
compensation therefor.

     Article 30. The people shall be liable to taxations as
provided by law.

     Article 31. No person shall be deprived of life or liberty,
nor shall any other criminal penalty be imposed, except according
to procedure established by law.

     Article 32. No person shall be denied the right of access to
the courts.

     Article 33. No person shall be apprehended except upon
warrant issued by a competent judicial officer which specifies
the offense with which the person is charged, unless he is
apprehended, the offense being committed.

     Article 34. No person shall be arrested or detained without
being at once informed of the charges against him or without the
immediate privilege of counsel; nor shall he be detained without
adequate cause; and upon demand of any person such cause must be
immediately shown in open court in his presence and the presence
of his counsel.

     Article 35. The right of all persons to be secure in their
homes, papers and effects against entries, searches and seizures
shall not be impaired except upon warrant issued for adequate
cause and particularly describing the place to be searched and
things to be seized, or except as provided by Article 33.

     (2) Each search or seizure shall be made upon separate
warrant Issued by a competent judicial officer.

     Article 36. The infliction of torture by any public officer
and cruel punishments are absolutely forbidden.

     Article 39. In all criminal cases the accused shall enjoy
the right to a speedy and public trial by an impartial tribunal.

     (2) He shall be permitted full opportunity to examine all
witnesses, and he shall have the right of compulsory process for
obtaining witnesses on his behalf at public expense.

     (3) At all times the accused shall have the assistance of
competent counsel who shall, if the accused is unable to secure
the same by his own efforts, be assigned to his use by the State.

     Article 38. No person shall be compelled to testify against
himself.

     (2) Confession made under compulsion, torture or threat, or
after prolonged arrest or detention shall not be admitted in
evidence.

     (3) No person shall be convicted or punished in cases where
the only proof against him is his own confession.

     Article 39. No person shall be held criminally liable for an
act which was lawful at the time it was committed, or of which he
has been acquitted, nor shall he be placed in double jeopardy.

     Article 40. Any person, in case he is acquitted after he has
been arrested or detained, may sue the State for redress as
provided by law.



                      CHAPTER IV. THE DIET

     Article 41. The Diet shall be the highest organ of state
power, and shall be the sole law-making organ of the State.

     Article 42. The Diet shall consist of two Houses, namely the
House of Representatives and the House of Councillors.

     Article 43. Both Houses shall consist of elected members,
representative of all the people.

     (2) The number of the members of each House shall be fixed
by law.

     Article 44. The qualifications of members of both Houses and
their electors shall be fixed by law. However, there shall be no
discrimination because of race, creed, sex, social status, family
origin, education, property or income.

     Article 45. The term of office of members of the House of
Representatives shall be four years. However, the term shall be
terminated before the full term is up in case the House of
Representatives is dissolved.

     Article 46. The term of office of members of the House of
Councillors shall be six years, and election for half the members
shall take place every three years.

     Article 47. Electoral districts, method of voting and other
matters pertaining to the method of election of members of both
Houses shall be fixed by law.

     Article 48. No person shall be permitted to be a member of
both Houses simultaneously.

     Article 49. Members of both Houses shall receive appropriate
annual payment from the national treasury in accordance with law.

     Article 50. Except in cases provided by law, members of both
Houses shall be exempt from apprehension while the Diet is in
session, and any members apprehended before the opening of the
session shall be freed during the term of the session upon demand
of the House.

     Article 51. Members of both Houses shall not be held liable
outside the House for speeches, debates or votes cast inside the
House.

     Article 52. An ordinary session of the Diet shall be
convoked once per year.

     Article 53. The Cabinet may determine to convoke
extraordinary sessions of the Diet. When a quarter or more of the
total members of either house makes the demand, the Cabinet must
determine on such convocation.

     Article 54. When the House of Representatives is dissolved,
there must be a general election of members of the House of
Representatives within forty (40) days from the date of
dissolution, and the Diet must be convoked within thirty (30)
days from the date of the election.

     (2) When the House of Representatives is dissolved, the
House of Councillors is closed at the same time. However, the
Cabinet may in time of national emergency convoke the House of
Councillors in emergency session.

     (3) Measures taken at such session as mentioned in the
proviso of the preceding paragraph shall be provisional and shall
become null and void unless agreed to by the House of
Representatives within a period of ten (10) days after the
opening of the next session of the Diet.

     Article 55. Each House shall judge disputes related to
qualifications of its members. However, in order to deny a seat
to any member, it is necessary to pass a resolution by a majority
of two-thirds or more of the members present.

     Article 56. Business cannot be transacted in either House
unless one third or more of total membership is present.

     (2) All matters shall be decided, in each House, by a
majority of those present, except as elsewhere provided in the
Constitution, and in case of a tie, the presiding officer shall
decide the issue.

     Article 57. Deliberation in each House shall be public.
However, a secret meeting may be held where a majority of
two-thirds or more of those members present passes a resolution
therefor.

     (2) Each House shall keep a record of proceedings. This
record shall be published and given general circulation,
excepting such parts of proceedings of secret session as may be
deemed to require secrecy.

     (3) Upon demand of one-fifth or more of the members present,
votes of the members on any matter shall be recorded in the
minutes.

     Article 58. Each house shall select its own president and
other officials.

     (2) Each House shall establish its rules pertaining to
meetings, proceedings and internal discipline, and may punish
members for disorderly conduct. However, in order to expel a
member, a majority of two-thirds or more of those members present
must pass a resolution thereon.

     Article 59. A bill becomes a law on passage by both Houses,
except as otherwise provided by the Constitution.

     (2) A bill which is passed by the House of Representatives,
and upon which the House of Councillors makes a decision
different from that of the House of Representatives, becomes a
law when passed a second time by the House of Representatives by
a majority of two-thirds or more of the members present.

     (3) The provision of the preceding paragraph does not
preclude the House of Representatives from calling for the
meeting of a joint committee of both Houses, provided for by law.

     (4) Failure by the House of Councillors to take final action
within sixty (60) days after receipt of a bill passed by the
House of Representatives, time in recess excepted, may be
determined by the House of Representatives to constitute a
rejection of the said bill by the House of Councillors.

     Article 60. The Budget must first be submitted to the House
of Representatives.

     (2) Upon consideration of the budget, when the House of
Councillors makes a decision different from that of the House of
Representatives, and when no agreement can be reached even
through a joint committee of both Houses, provided for by law, or
in the case of failure by the House of Councillors to take final
action within thirty (30) days, the period of recess excluded,
after the receipt of the budget passed by the House of
Representatives, the decision of the House of Representatives
shall be the decision of the Diet.

     Article 61. The second paragraph of the preceding article
applies also to the Diet approval required for the conclusion of
treaties.

     Article 62. Each House may conduct investigations in
relation to government, and may demand the presence and testimony
of witnesses, and the production of records.

     Article 63. The Prime Minister and other Ministers of State
may, at any time, appear in either House for the purpose of
speaking on bills, regardless of whether they are members of the
House or not. They must appear when their presence is required in
order to give answers or explanations.

     Article 64. The Diet shall set up an impeachment court from
among the members of both Houses for the purpose of trying judges
against whom removal proceedings have been instituted.

     (2) Matters relating to impeachment shall be provided by law.



                     CHAPTER V. THE CABINET

     Article 65. Executive power shall be vested in the Cabinet.

     Article 66. The Cabinet shall consist of the Prime Minister,
who shall be its head, and other Ministers of State, as provided
for by law.

     (2) The Prime Minister and other Minister of State must be
civilians.

     (3) The Cabinet, in the exercise of executive power, shall
be collectively responsible to the Diet.

     Article 67. The Prime Minister shall be designated from
among the members of the Diet by a resolution of the Diet. This
designation shall precede all other business.

     (2) If the House of Representatives and the House of
Councillors disagrees and if no agreement can be reached even
through a joint committee of both Houses, provided for by law, or
the House of Councillors fails to make designation within ten
(10) days, exclusive of the period of recess, after the House of
Representatives has made designation, the decision of the House
of Representatives shall be the decision of the Diet.

     Article 68. The Prime Minister shall appoint the Ministers
of State. However, a majority of their number must be chosen from
among the members of the Diet.

     (2) The Prime Minister may remove the Ministers of State as
he chooses.

     Article 69. If the House of Representatives passes a
non-confidence resolution, or rejects a confidence resolution,
the Cabinet shall resign en masse, unless the House of
Representatives is dissolved with ten (10) days.

     Article 70. When there is a vacancy in the post of Prime
Minister, or upon the first convocation of the Diet after a
general election of members of the House of Representatives, the
Cabinet shall resign en masse.

     Article 71. In the cases mentioned in the two preceding
articles, the Cabinet shall continue its functions until the time
when a new Prime Minister is appointed.

     Article 72. The Prime Minister, representing the Cabinet,
submits bills, reports on general national affairs and foreign
relations to the Diet and exercises control and supervision over
various administrative branches.

     Article 73. The Cabinet, in addition to other general
administrative functions, shall perform the following functions:

     (i)   Administer the law faithfully; conduct affairs of state;

     (ii)  Manage foreign affairs;

     (iii) Conclude treaties. However, it shall obtain prior
           or, depending on circumstances, subsequent
           approval of the Diet;

     (iv)  Administer the civil service, in accordance with
           standards established by law;

     (v)   Prepare the budget, and present it to the Diet;

     (vi)  Enact cabinet orders in order to execute the provisions
           of this Constitution and of the law. However, it cannot
           include penal provisions in such cabinet orders unless
           authorized by such law.

     (vii) Decide on general amnesty, special amnesty, commutation
           of punishment, reprieve, and restoration of rights.

     Article 74. All laws and cabinet orders shall be signed by
the competent Minister of state and countersigned by the Prime
Minister.

     Article 75. The Ministers of state, during their tenure of
office, shall not be subject to legal action without the consent
of the Prime Minister. However, the right to take that action is
not impaired hereby.



                      CHAPTER VI. JUDICIARY

     Article 76. The whole judicial power is vested in a Supreme
Court and in such inferior courts as are established by law.

     (2) No extraordinary tribunal shall be established, nor
shall any organ or agency of the Executive be given final
judicial power.

     (3) All judges shall be independent in the exercise of their
conscience and shall be bound only by this Constitution and the
laws.

     Article 77. The Supreme Court is vested with the rule-making
power under which it determines the rules of procedure and of
practice, and of matters relating to attorneys, the internal
discipline of the courts and the administration of judicial
affairs.

     (2) Public procurators shall be subject to the rule-making
power of the Supreme Court.

     (3) The Supreme Court may delegate the power to make rules
for inferior courts to such courts.

     Article 78. Judges shall not be removed except by public
impeachment unless judicially declared mentally or physically
incompetent to perform official duties. No disciplinary action
against judges shall be administered by any executive organ or
agency.

     Article 79. The Supreme Court shall consist of a Chief Judge
and such number of judges as may be determined by law; all such
judges excepting the Chief Judge shall be appointed by the
Cabinet.

     (2) The appointment of the judges of the Supreme Court shall
be reviewed by the people at the first general election of
members of the House of Representatives following their
appointment, and shall be reviewed again at the first general
election of members of the House of Representatives after a lapse
of ten (10) years, and in the same manner thereafter.

     (3) In cases mentioned in the foregoing paragraph, when the
majority of the voters favors the dismissal of a judge, he shall
be dismissed.

     (4) Matters pertaining to review shall be prescribed by law.

     (5) The judges of the Supreme Court shall of retired upon
the attainment of the age as fixed by law.

     (6) All such judges shall receive, at regular stated
intervals, adequate compensation which shall not be decreased
during their terms of office.

     Article 80. The judges of the inferior courts shall be
appointed by the Cabinet from a list of persons nominated by the
Supreme Court. All such judges shall hold office for a term of
ten (10) years with privilege of reappointment, provided that
they shall be retired upon the attainment of the age as fixed by
law.

     (2) The judges of the inferior courts shall receive, at
regular stated intervals, adequate compensation which shall not
be decreased during their terms of office.

     Article 81. The Supreme Court is the court of last resort
with power to determine the constitutionality of any law, order,
regulation or official act.

     Article 82. Trials shall be conducted and judgment declared
publicly.

     (2) Where a court unanimously determines publicity to be
dangerous to public order or morals, a trial may be conducted
privately, but trials of political offenses, offenses involving
the press or cases wherein the rights of people as guaranteed in
Chapter III of this Constitution are in question shall always be
conducted publicly.



                      CHAPTER VII. FINANCE

     Article 83. The power to administer national finances shall
be exercised as the Diet shall determine.

     Article 84. No new taxes shall be imposed or existing ones
modified except by law or under such conditions as law may
prescribe.

     Article 85. No money shall be expended, nor shall the State
obligate itself, except as authorized by the Diet.

     Article 86. Cabinet shall prepare and submit to the Diet for
its consideration and decision a budget for each fiscal year.

     Article 87. In order to provide for unforeseen deficiencies
in the budget, a reserve fund may be authorized by the Diet to be
expended upon the responsibility of the Cabinet.

     (2) The Cabinet must get subsequent approval of the Diet for
all payments from the reserve fund.

     Article 88. All property of the Imperial Household shall
belong to the State. All expenses of the Imperial Household shall
be appropriated by the Diet in the budget.

     Article 89. No public money or other property shall be
expended or appropriated for the use, benefit or maintenance of
any religious institution or association or for any charitable,
educational benevolent enterprises not under the control of
public authority.

     Article 90. Final accounts of the expenditures and revenues
of State shall be audited annually by a Board of Audit and
submitted by the Cabinet to the Diet, together with the statement
of audit, during the fiscal year immediately following the period
covered.

     (2) The organization and competency of the Board of Audit
shall determined by law.

     Article 91. At regular intervals and at least annually the
Cabinet shall report to the Diet and the people on the state of
national finances.



              CHAPTER VIII. LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT

     Article 92. Regulations concerning organization and
operations of local public entities shall be fixed by law in
accordance with the principle of local autonomy.

     Article 93. The local public entities shall establish
assemblies as their deliberative organs, in accordance with law.

     (2) The chief executive officers of all local public
entities, the members of their assemblies, and such other local
officials as may be determined by law shall be elected by direct
popular vote within their several communities'

     Article 94. Local entities shall have the right to manage
their property, affairs and administration and to enact their own
regulations within law.

     Article 95. A special law, applicable to one local public
entity, cannot be enacted by the Diet without the consent of the
majority of the voters of the local public entity concerned,
obtained in accordance with law.



                     CHAPTER IX. AMENDMENTS

     Article 96. Amendment to this Constitution shall be
initiated by the Diet, through a concurring vote of two-thirds or
more of all the members of each House and shall thereupon be
submitted to the people for ratification which shall require the
affirmative vote of a majority of all votes cast thereon, at
special referendum or at such election as the Diet shall specify.

     (2) Amendments when so ratified shall immediately be
promulgated by the Emperor in the name of the people, as an
integral part of this Constitution.



                     CHAPTER X. SUPREME LAW

     Article 97. The fundamental human rights by this
Constitution guaranteed to the people of Japan are fruits of the
age-old struggle of man to be free; they have survived the many
exacting tests for durability and are conferred upon this and
future generations in trust, to be held for all time inviolate.

     Article 98. This Constitution shall be the supreme law of
the nation and no law, ordinance, imperial rescript or other act
of government, or part thereof, contrary to the provisions
hereof, shall have legal force or validity.

     (2) The treaties concluded by Japan and established laws of
nations shall be faithfully observed.

     Article 99. The Emperor or the Regent as well as Ministers
of State, members of the Diet, judges, and all other public
officials have the obligation to respect and uphold this
Constitution.



              CHAPTER XI. SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS

     Article 100. This Constitution shall be enforced as from the
day when the period of six months will have elapsed counting from
the day of its promulgation.

     (2) The enactment of laws necessary for the enforcement of
this Constitution the election of members of the House of
Councillors and the procedure for the convocation of the Diet and
other preparatory procedures for the enforcement of this
Constitution may be executed before the day prescribed in the
preceding paragraph.

     Article 101. If the House of Councilors is not constituted
before the effective date of this Constitution, the House of
Representatives shall function as the Diet until such time as the
House of Councilors shall be constituted.

     Article 102. The term of office for half the members of the
House of Councillors serving in the first term under this
Constitution shall be three years. Members falling under this
category shall be determined in accordance with law.

     Article 103. The Ministers of State, members of the House of
Representatives, and judges in office on the effective date of
this Constitution, and all other public officials, who occupy
positions corresponding to such positions as are recognized by
this Constitution shall not forfeit their positions automatically
on account of the enforcement of this Constitution unless
otherwise specified by law. When, however, successors are elected
or appointed under the provisions of this Constitution, they
shall forfeit their positions as a matter of course.








End of Project Gutenberg's The Constitution of Japan, 1946, by Japan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CONSTITUTION OF JAPAN, 1946 ***

***** This file should be named 612.txt or 612.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/612/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
