Project Gutenberg's The Constitution of the Empire of Japan, 1889, by Japan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Constitution of the Empire of Japan, 1889

Author: Japan

Posting Date: July 26, 2008 [EBook #613]
Release Date: August, 1996

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONSTITUTION OF JAPAN, 1889 ***














            CONSTITUTION OF THE EMPIRE OF JAPAN, 1889


Imperial Oath Sworn in the Sanctuary in the Imperial Palace
(Tsuge-bumi)

     We, the Successor to the prosperous Throne of Our
Predecessors, do humbly and solemnly swear to the Imperial
Founder of Our House and to Our other Imperial Ancestors that, in
pursuance of a great policy co-extensive with the Heavens and
with the Earth, We shall maintain and secure from decline the
ancient form of government.

     In consideration of the progressive tendency of the course
of human affairs and in parallel with the advance of
civilization, We deem it expedient, in order to give clearness
and distinctness to the instructions bequeathed by the Imperial
Founder of Our House and by Our other Imperial Ancestors, to
establish fundamental laws formulated into express provisions of
law, so that, on the one hand, Our Imperial posterity may possess
an express guide for the course they are to follow, and that, on
the other, Our subjects shall thereby be enabled to enjoy a wider
range of action in giving Us their support, and that the
observance of Our laws shall continue to the remotest ages of
time. We will thereby to give greater firmness to the stability
of Our country and to promote the welfare of all the people
within the boundaries of Our dominions; and We now establish the
Imperial House Law and the Constitution. These Laws come to only
an exposition of grand precepts for the conduct of the
government, bequeathed by the Imperial Founder of Our House and
by Our other Imperial Ancestors. That we have been so fortunate
in Our reign, in keeping with the tendency of the times, as to
accomplish this work, We owe to the glorious Spirits of the
Imperial Founder of Our House and of Our other Imperial Ancestors.

     We now reverently make Our prayer to Them and to Our
Illustrious Father, and implore the help of Their Sacred Spirits,
and make to Them solemn oath never at this time nor in the future
to fail to be an example to our subjects in the observance of the
Laws hereby established.

     May the heavenly Spirits witness this Our solemn Oath.



    Imperial Rescript on the Promulgation of the Constitution

     Whereas We make it the joy and glory of Our heart to behold
the prosperity of Our country, and the welfare of Our subjects,
We do hereby, in virtue of the Supreme power We inherit from Our
Imperial Ancestors, promulgate the present immutable fundamental
law, for the sake of Our present subjects and their descendants.

     The Imperial Founder of Our House and Our other Imperial
ancestors, by the help and support of the forefathers of Our
subjects, laid the foundation of Our Empire upon a basis, which
is to last forever. That this brilliant achievement embellishes
the annals of Our country, is due to the glorious virtues of Our
Sacred Imperial ancestors, and to the loyalty and bravery of Our
subjects, their love of their country and their public spirit.
Considering that Our subjects are the descendants of the loyal
and good subjects of Our Imperial Ancestors, We doubt not but
that Our subjects will be guided by Our views, and will
sympathize with all Our endeavors, and that, harmoniously
cooperating together, they will share with Us Our hope of making
manifest the glory of Our country, both at home and abroad, and
of securing forever the stability of the work bequeathed to Us by
Our Imperial Ancestors.



                   Preamble [or Edict] (Joyu)

     Having, by virtue of the glories of Our Ancestors, ascended
the throne of a lineal succession unbroken for ages eternal;
desiring to promote the welfare of, and to give development to
the moral and intellectual faculties of Our beloved subjects, the
very same that have been favored with the benevolent care and
affectionate vigilance of Our Ancestors; and hoping to maintain
the prosperity of the State, in concert with Our people and with
their support, We hereby promulgate, in pursuance of Our Imperial
Rescript of the 12th day of the 10th month of the 14th year of
Meiji, a fundamental law of the State, to exhibit the principles,
by which We are guided in Our conduct, and to point out to what
Our descendants and Our subjects and their descendants are
forever to conform.

     The right of sovereignty of the State, We have inherited
from Our Ancestors, and We shall bequeath them to Our
descendants. Neither We nor they shall in the future fail to
wield them, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution
hereby granted.

     We now declare to respect and protect the security of the
rights and of the property of Our people, and to secure to them
the complete enjoyment of the same, within the extent of the
provisions of the present Constitution and of the law.

     The Imperial Diet shall first be convoked for the 23rd year
of Meiji and the time of its opening shall be the date, when the
present Constitution comes into force.

     When in the future it may become necessary to amend any of
the provisions of the present Constitution, We or Our successors
shall assume the initiative right, and submit a project for the
same to the Imperial Diet. The Imperial Diet shall pass its vote
upon it, according to the conditions imposed by the present
Constitution, and in no otherwise shall Our descendants or Our
subjects be permitted to attempt any alteration thereof.

     Our Ministers of State, on Our behalf, shall be held
responsible for the carrying out of the present Constitution, and
Our present and future subjects shall forever assume the duty of
allegiance to the present Constitution.



                     CHAPTER I. THE EMPEROR

     Article 1. The Empire of Japan shall be reigned over and
governed by a line of Emperors unbroken for ages eternal.

     Article 2. The Imperial Throne shall be succeeded to by
Imperial male descendants, according to the provisions of the
Imperial House Law.

     Article 3. The Emperor is sacred and inviolable.

     Article 4. The Emperor is the head of the Empire, combining
in Himself the rights of sovereignty, and exercises them,
according to the provisions of the present Constitution.

     Article 5. The Emperor exercises the legislative power with
the consent of the Imperial Diet.

     Article 6. The Emperor gives sanction to laws, and orders
them to be promulgated and executed.

     Article 7. The Emperor convokes the Imperial Diet, opens,
closes, and prorogues it, and dissolves the House of
Representatives.

     Article 8. The Emperor, in consequence of an urgent
necessity to maintain public safety or to avert public
calamities, issues, when the Imperial Diet is not sitting,
Imperial ordinances in the place of law.

     (2) Such Imperial Ordinances are to be laid before the
Imperial Diet at its next session, and when the Diet does not
approve the said Ordinances, the Government shall declare them to
be invalid for the future.

     Article 9. The Emperor issues or causes to be issued, the
Ordinances necessary for the carrying out of the laws, or for the
maintenance of the public peace and order, and for the promotion
of the welfare of the subjects. But no Ordinance shall in any way
alter any of the existing laws.

     Article 10. The Emperor determines the organization of the
different branches of the administration, and salaries of all
civil and military officers, and appoints and dismisses the same.
Exceptions especially provided for in the present Constitution or
in other laws, shall be in accordance with the respective
provisions (bearing thereon).

     Article 11. The Emperor has the supreme command of the Army
and Navy.

     Article 12. The Emperor determines the organization and
peace standing of the Army and Navy.

     Article 13. The Emperor declares war, makes peace, and
concludes treaties.

     Article 14. The Emperor declares a state of siege.

     (2) The conditions and effects of a state of siege shall be
determined by law.

     Article 15. The Emperor confers titles of nobility, rank,
orders and other marks of honor.

     Article 16. The Emperor orders amnesty, pardon, commutation
of punishments and rehabilitation.

     Article 17. A Regency shall be instituted in conformity with
the provisions of the Imperial House Law.

     (2) The Regent shall exercise the powers appertaining to the
Emperor in His name.



            CHAPTER II. RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF SUBJECTS

     Article 18. The conditions necessary for being a Japanese
subject shall be determined by law.

     Article 19. Japanese subjects may, according to
qualifications determined in laws or ordinances, be appointed to
civil or military or any other public offices equally.

     Article 20. Japanese subjects are amenable to service in the
Army or Navy, according to the provisions of law.

     Article 21. Japanese subjects are amenable to the duty of
paying taxes, according to the provisions of law.

     Article 22. Japanese subjects shall have the liberty of
abode and of changing the same within the limits of the law.

     Article 23. No Japanese subject shall be arrested, detained,
tried or punished, unless according to law.

     Article 24. No Japanese subject shall be deprived of his
right of being tried by the  judges determined by law.

     Article 25. Except in the cases provided for in the law, the
house of no Japanese subject shall be entered or searched without
his consent.

     Article 26. Except in the cases mentioned in the law, the
secrecy of the letters of every Japanese subject shall remain
inviolate.

     Article 27. The right of property of every Japanese subject
shall remain inviolate.

     (2) Measures necessary to be taken for the public benefit
shall be any provided for by law.

     Article 28. Japanese subjects shall, within limits not
prejudicial to peace and order, and not antagonistic to their
duties as subjects, enjoy freedom of religious belief.

     Article 29. Japanese subjects shall, within the limits of
law, enjoy the liberty of speech, writing, publication, public
meetings and associations.

     Article 30. Japanese subjects may present petitions, by
observing the proper forms of respect, and by complying with the
rules specially provided for the same.

     Article 31. The provisions contained in the present Chapter
shall not affect the exercises of the powers appertaining to the
Emperor, in times of war or in cases of a national emergency.

     Article 32. Each and every one of the provisions contained
in the preceding Articles of the present Chapter, that are not in
conflict with the laws or the rules and discipline of the Army
and Navy, shall apply to the officers and men of the Army and of
the Navy.



                 CHAPTER III. THE IMPERIAL DIET

     Article 33. The Imperial Diet shall consist of two Houses, a
House of Peers and a House of Representatives.

     Article 34. The House of Peers shall, in accordance with the
ordinance concerning the House of Peers, be composed of the
members of the Imperial Family, of the orders of nobility, and of
those who have been nominated thereto by the Emperor.

     Article 35. The House of Representatives shall be composed
of members elected by the people, according to the provisions of
the law of Election.

     Article 36. No one can at one and the same time be a Member
of both Houses.

     Article 37. Every law requires the consent of the Imperial
Diet.

     Article 38. Both Houses shall vote upon projects of law
submitted to it by the Government, and may respectively initiate
projects of law.

     Article 39. A Bill, which has been rejected by either the
one or the other of the two Houses, shall not be brought in again
during the same session.

     Article 40. Both Houses can make representations to the
Government, as to laws or upon any other subject. When, however,
such representations are not accepted, they cannot be made a
second time during the same session.

     Article 41. The Imperial Diet shall be convoked every year.

     Article 42. A session of the Imperial Diet shall last during
three months. In case of necessity, the duration of a session may
be prolonged by the Imperial Order.

     Article 43. When urgent necessity arises, an extraordinary
session may be convoked in addition to the ordinary one.

     (2) The duration of an extraordinary session shall be
determined by Imperial Order.

     Article 44. The opening, closing, prolongation of session
and prorogation of the Imperial Diet, shall be effected
simultaneously for both Houses.

     (2) In case the House of Representatives has been ordered to
dissolve, the House of Peers shall at the same time be prorogued.

     Article 45. When the House of Representatives has been
ordered to dissolve, Members shall be caused by Imperial Order to
be newly elected, and the new House shall be convoked within five
months from the day of dissolution.

     Article 46. No debate can be opened and no vote can be taken
in either House of the Imperial Diet, unless not less than
one-third of the whole number of Members thereof is present.

     Article 47. Votes shall be taken in both Houses by absolute
majority. In the case of a tie vote, the President shall have the
casting vote.

     Article 48. The deliberations of both Houses shall be held
in public. The deliberations may, however, upon demand of the
Government or by resolution of the House, be held in secret
sitting.

     Article 49. Both Houses of the Imperial Diet may
respectively present addresses to the Emperor.

     Article 50. Both Houses may receive petitions presented by
subjects.

     Article 51. Both Houses may enact, besides what is provided
for in the present Constitution and in the Law of the Houses,
rules necessary for the management of their internal affairs.

     Article 52. No Member of either House shall be held
responsible outside the respective Houses, for any opinion
uttered or for any vote given in the House. When, however, a
Member himself has given publicity to his opinions by public
speech, by documents in print or in writing, or by any other
similar means, he shall, in the matter, be amenable to the
general law.

     Article 53. The Members of both Houses shall, during the
session, be free from arrest, unless with the consent of the
House, except in cases of flagrant delicts, or of offenses
connected with a state of internal commotion or with a foreign
trouble.

     Article 54. The Ministers of State and the Delegates of the
Government may, at any time, take seats and speak in either
House.



    CHAPTER IV. THE MINISTERS OF STATE AND THE PRIVY COUNCIL

     Article 55. The respective Ministers of State shall give
their advice to the Emperor, and be responsible for it.

     (2) All Laws, Imperial Ordinances, and Imperial Rescripts of
whatever kind, that relate to the affairs of the state, require
the countersignature of a Minister of State.

     Article 56. The Privy Councillors shall, in accordance with
the provisions for the organization of the Privy Council,
deliberate upon important matters of State when they have been
consulted by the Emperor.



                    CHAPTER V. THE JUDICATURE

     Article 57. The Judicature shall be exercised by the Courts
of Law according to law, in the name of the Emperor.

     (2) The organization of the Courts of Law shall be
determined by law.

     Article 58. The judges shall be appointed from among those,
who possess proper qualifications according to law.

     (2) No judge shall be deprived of his position, unless by
way of criminal sentence or disciplinary punishment.

     (3) Rules for disciplinary punishment shall be determined by
law.

     Article 59. Trials and judgments of a Court shall be
conducted publicly. When, however, there exists any fear, that
such publicity may be prejudicial to peace and order, or to the
maintenance of public morality, the public trial may be suspended
by provisions of law or by the decision of the Court of Law.

     Article 60. All matters that fall within the competency of a
special Court, shall be specially provided for by law.

     Article 61. No suit at law, which relates to rights alleged
to have been infringed by the illegal measures of the
administrative authorities, and which shall come within the
competency of the Court of Administrative Litigation specially
established by law, shall be taken cognizance of by Court of Law.



                       CHAPTER VI. FINANCE

     Article 62. The imposition of a new tax or the modification
of the rates (of an existing one) shall be determined by law.

     (2) However, all such administrative fees or other revenue
having the nature of compensation shall not fall within the
category of the above clause.

     (3) The raising of national loans and the contracting of
other liabilities to the charge of the National Treasury, except
those that are provided in the Budget, shall require the consent
of the Imperial Diet.

     Article 63. The taxes levied at present shall, in so far as
they are not remodelled by a new law, be collected according to
the old system.

     Article 64. The expenditure and revenue of the State require
the consent of the Imperial Diet by means of an annual Budget.

     (2) Any and all expenditures overpassing the appropriations
set forth in the Titles and Paragraphs of the Budget, or that are
not provided for in the Budget, shall subsequently require the
approbation of the Imperial Diet.

     Article 65. The Budget shall be first laid before the House
of Representatives.

     Article 66. The expenditures of the Imperial House shall be
defrayed every year out of the National Treasury, according to
the present fixed amount for the same, and shall not require the
consent thereto of the Imperial Diet, except in case an increase
thereof is found necessary.

     Article 67. Those already fixed expenditures based by the
Constitution upon the powers appertaining to the Emperor, and
such expenditures as may have arisen by the effect of law, or
that appertain to the legal obligations of the Government, shall
be neither rejected nor reduced by the Imperial Diet, without the
concurrence of the Government.

     Article 68. In order to meet special requirements, the
Government may ask the consent of the Imperial Diet to a certain
amount as a Continuing Expenditure Fund, for a previously fixed
number of years.

     Article 69. In order to supply deficiencies, which are
unavoidable, in the Budget, and to meet requirements unprovided
for in the same, a Reserve Fund shall be provided in the Budget.

     Article 70. When the Imperial Diet cannot be convoked, owing
to the external or internal condition of the country, in case of
urgent need for the maintenance of public safety, the Government
may take all necessary financial measures, by means of an
Imperial Ordinance.

     (2) In the case mentioned in the preceding clause, the
matter shall be submitted to the Imperial Diet at its next
session, and its approbation shall be obtained thereto.

     Article 71. When the Imperial Diet has not voted on the
Budget, or when the Budget has not been brought into actual
existence, the Government shall carry out the Budget of the
preceding year.

     Article 72. The final account of the expenditures and
revenues of the State shall be verified and confirmed by the
Board of Audit, and it shall be submitted by the Government to
the Imperial Diet, together with the report of verification of
the said board.

     (2) The organization and competency of the Board of Audit
shall of determined by law separately.



                CHAPTER VII. SUPPLEMENTARY RULES

     Article 73. When it has become necessary in future to amend
the provisions of the present Constitution, a project to the
effect shall be submitted to the Imperial Diet by Imperial Order.

     (2) In the above case, neither House can open the debate,
unless not less than two-thirds of the whole number of Members
are present, and no amendment can be passed, unless a majority of
not less than two-thirds of the Members present is obtained.

     Article 74. No modification of the Imperial House Law shall
be required to be submitted to the deliberation of the Imperial
Diet.

     (2) No provision of the present Constitution can be modified
by the Imperial House Law.

     Article 75. No modification can be introduced into the
Constitution, or into the Imperial House Law, during the time of
a Regency.

     Article 76. Existing legal enactments, such as laws,
regulations, Ordinances, or by whatever names they may be called,
shall, so far as they do not conflict with the present
Constitution, continue in force.

     (2) All existing contracts or orders, that entail
obligations upon the Government, and that are connected with
expenditure, shall come within the scope of Article 67.



(The above is the semi-official translation, which appeared in H.
Ito, Commentaries on the Constitution of the Empire of Japan,
trans. M. Ito, 1889.)








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Constitution of the Empire of
Japan, 1889, by Japan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CONSTITUTION OF JAPAN, 1889 ***

***** This file should be named 613.txt or 613.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/613/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
