The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Figure in the Carpet, by Henry James


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Figure in the Carpet


Author: Henry James



Release Date: February 4, 2013  [eBook #645]
[This file was first posted on September 11, 1996]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIGURE IN THE CARPET***


credit



Transcribed from the 1916 Martin Secker edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                         THE FIGURE IN THE CARPET


                              BY HENRY JAMES

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                                * * * * *

                          LONDON; MARTIN SECKER
                     NUMBER FIVE JOHN STREET ADELPHI

                                * * * * *

                    This edition first published 1916
                       The text follows that of the
                            Definitive Edition




CHAPTER I


I HAD done a few things and earned a few pence--I had perhaps even had
time to begin to think I was finer than was perceived by the patronising;
but when I take the little measure of my course (a fidgety habit, for
it's none of the longest yet) I count my real start from the evening
George Corvick, breathless and worried, came in to ask me a service.  He
had done more things than I, and earned more pence, though there were
chances for cleverness I thought he sometimes missed.  I could only
however that evening declare to him that he never missed one for
kindness.  There was almost rapture in hearing it proposed to me to
prepare for _The Middle_, the organ of our lucubrations, so called from
the position in the week of its day of appearance, an article for which
he had made himself responsible and of which, tied up with a stout
string, he laid on my table the subject.  I pounced upon my
opportunity--that is on the first volume of it--and paid scant attention
to my friend's explanation of his appeal.  What explanation could be more
to the point than my obvious fitness for the task?  I had written on Hugh
Vereker, but never a word in _The Middle_, where my dealings were mainly
with the ladies and the minor poets.  This was his new novel, an advance
copy, and whatever much or little it should do for his reputation I was
clear on the spot as to what it should do for mine.  Moreover if I always
read him as soon as I could get hold of him I had a particular reason for
wishing to read him now: I had accepted an invitation to Bridges for the
following Sunday, and it had been mentioned in Lady Jane's note that Mr.
Vereker was to be there.  I was young enough for a flutter at meeting a
man of his renown, and innocent enough to believe the occasion would
demand the display of an acquaintance with his "last."

Corvick, who had promised a review of it, had not even had time to read
it; he had gone to pieces in consequence of news requiring--as on
precipitate reflexion he judged--that he should catch the night-mail to
Paris.  He had had a telegram from Gwendolen Erme in answer to his letter
offering to fly to her aid.  I knew already about Gwendolen Erme; I had
never seen her, but I had my ideas, which were mainly to the effect that
Corvick would marry her if her mother would only die.  That lady seemed
now in a fair way to oblige him; after some dreadful mistake about a
climate or a "cure" she had suddenly collapsed on the return from abroad.
Her daughter, unsupported and alarmed, desiring to make a rush for home
but hesitating at the risk, had accepted our friend's assistance, and it
was my secret belief that at sight of him Mrs. Erme would pull round.
His own belief was scarcely to be called secret; it discernibly at any
rate differed from mine.  He had showed me Gwendolen's photograph with
the remark that she wasn't pretty but was awfully interesting; she had
published at the age of nineteen a novel in three volumes, "Deep Down,"
about which, in _The Middle_, he had been really splendid.  He
appreciated my present eagerness and undertook that the periodical in
question should do no less; then at the last, with his hand on the door,
he said to me: "Of course you'll be all right, you know."  Seeing I was a
trifle vague he added: "I mean you won't be silly."

"Silly--about Vereker!  Why what do I ever find him but awfully clever?"

"Well, what's that but silly?  What on earth does 'awfully clever' mean?
For God's sake try to get _at_ him.  Don't let him suffer by our
arrangement.  Speak of him, you know, if you can, as _I_ should have
spoken of him."

I wondered an instant.  "You mean as far and away the biggest of the
lot--that sort of thing?"

Corvick almost groaned.  "Oh you know, I don't put them back to back that
way; it's the infancy of art!  But he gives me a pleasure so rare; the
sense of"--he mused a little--"something or other."

I wondered again.  "The sense, pray, of want?"

"My dear man, that's just what I want _you_ to say!"

Even before he had banged the door I had begun, book in hand, to prepare
myself to say it.  I sat up with Vereker half the night; Corvick couldn't
have done more than that.  He was awfully clever--I stuck to that, but he
wasn't a bit the biggest of the lot.  I didn't allude to the lot,
however; I flattered myself that I emerged on this occasion from the
infancy of art.  "It's all right," they declared vividly at the office;
and when the number appeared I felt there was a basis on which I could
meet the great man.  It gave me confidence for a day or two--then that
confidence dropped.  I had fancied him reading it with relish, but if
Corvick wasn't satisfied how could Vereker himself be?  I reflected
indeed that the heat of the admirer was sometimes grosser even than the
appetite of the scribe.  Corvick at all events wrote me from Paris a
little ill-humouredly.  Mrs. Erme was pulling round, and I hadn't at all
said what Vereker gave him the sense of.




CHAPTER II


THE effect of my visit to Bridges was to turn me out for more profundity.
Hugh Vereker, as I saw him there, was of a contact so void of angles that
I blushed for the poverty of imagination involved in my small
precautions.  If he was in spirits it wasn't because he had read my
review; in fact on the Sunday morning I felt sure he hadn't read it,
though _The Middle_ had been out three days and bloomed, I assured
myself, in the stiff garden of periodicals which gave one of the ormolu
tables the air of a stand at a station.  The impression he made on me
personally was such that I wished him to read it, and I corrected to this
end with a surreptitious hand what might be wanting in the careless
conspicuity of the sheet.  I'm afraid I even watched the result of my
manoeuvre, but up to luncheon I watched in vain.

When afterwards, in the course of our gregarious walk, I found myself for
half an hour, not perhaps without another manoeuvre, at the great man's
side, the result of his affability was a still livelier desire that he
shouldn't remain in ignorance of the peculiar justice I had done him.  It
wasn't that he seemed to thirst for justice; on the contrary I hadn't yet
caught in his talk the faintest grunt of a grudge--a note for which my
young experience had already given me an ear.  Of late he had had more
recognition, and it was pleasant, as we used to say in _The Middle_, to
see how it drew him out.  He wasn't of course popular, but I judged one
of the sources of his good humour to be precisely that his success was
independent of that.  He had none the less become in a manner the
fashion; the critics at least had put on a spurt and caught up with him.
We had found out at last how clever he was, and he had had to make the
best of the loss of his mystery.  I was strongly tempted, as I walked
beside him, to let him know how much of that unveiling was my act; and
there was a moment when I probably should have done so had not one of the
ladies of our party, snatching a place at his other elbow, just then
appealed to him in a spirit comparatively selfish.  It was very
discouraging: I almost felt the liberty had been taken with myself.

I had had on my tongue's end, for my own part, a phrase or two about the
right word at the right time; but later on I was glad not to have spoken,
for when on our return we clustered at tea I perceived Lady Jane, who had
not been out with us, brandishing _The Middle_ with her longest arm.  She
had taken it up at her leisure; she was delighted with what she had
found, and I saw that, as a mistake in a man may often be a felicity in a
woman, she would practically do for me what I hadn't been able to do for
myself.  "Some sweet little truths that needed to be spoken," I heard her
declare, thrusting the paper at rather a bewildered couple by the
fireplace.  She grabbed it away from them again on the reappearance of
Hugh Vereker, who after our walk had been upstairs to change something.
"I know you don't in general look at this kind of thing, but it's an
occasion really for doing so.  You _haven't_ seen it?  Then you must.
The man has actually got _at_ you, at what _I_ always feel, you know."
Lady Jane threw into her eyes a look evidently intended to give an idea
of what she always felt; but she added that she couldn't have expressed
it.  The man in the paper expressed it in a striking manner.  "Just see
there, and there, where I've dashed it, how he brings it out."  She had
literally marked for him the brightest patches of my prose, and if I was
a little amused Vereker himself may well have been.  He showed how much
he was when before us all Lady Jane wanted to read something aloud.  I
liked at any rate the way he defeated her purpose by jerking the paper
affectionately out of her clutch.  He'd take it upstairs with him and
look at it on going to dress.  He did this half an hour later--I saw it
in his hand when he repaired to his room.  That was the moment at which,
thinking to give her pleasure, I mentioned to Lady Jane that I was the
author of the review.  I did give her pleasure, I judged, but perhaps not
quite so much as I had expected.  If the author was "only me" the thing
didn't seem quite so remarkable.  Hadn't I had the effect rather of
diminishing the lustre of the article than of adding to my own?  Her
ladyship was subject to the most extraordinary drops.  It didn't matter;
the only effect I cared about was the one it would have on Vereker up
there by his bedroom fire.

At dinner I watched for the signs of this impression, tried to fancy some
happier light in his eyes; but to my disappointment Lady Jane gave me no
chance to make sure.  I had hoped she'd call triumphantly down the table,
publicly demand if she hadn't been right.  The party was large--there
were people from outside as well, but I had never seen a table long
enough to deprive Lady Jane of a triumph.  I was just reflecting in truth
that this interminable board would deprive _me_ of one when the guest
next me, dear woman--she was Miss Poyle, the vicar's sister, a robust
unmodulated person--had the happy inspiration and the unusual courage to
address herself across it to Vereker, who was opposite, but not directly,
so that when he replied they were both leaning forward.  She enquired,
artless body, what he thought of Lady Jane's "panegyric," which she had
read--not connecting it however with her right-hand neighbour; and while
I strained my ear for his reply I heard him, to my stupefaction, call
back gaily, his mouth full of bread: "Oh, it's all right--the usual
twaddle!"

I had caught Vereker's glance as he spoke, but Miss Poyle's surprise was
a fortunate cover for my own.  "You mean he doesn't do you justice?" said
the excellent woman.

Vereker laughed out, and I was happy to be able to do the same.  "It's a
charming article," he tossed us.

Miss Poyle thrust her chin half across the cloth.  "Oh, you're so deep!"
she drove home.

"As deep as the ocean!  All I pretend is that the author doesn't see--"
But a dish was at this point passed over his shoulder, and we had to wait
while he helped himself.

"Doesn't see what?" my neighbour continued.

"Doesn't see anything."

"Dear me--how very stupid!"

"Not a bit," Vereker laughed main.  "Nobody does."

The lady on his further side appealed to him, and Miss Poyle sank back to
myself.  "Nobody sees anything!" she cheerfully announced; to which I
replied that I had often thought so too, but had somehow taken the
thought for a proof on my own part of a tremendous eye.  I didn't tell
her the article was mine; and I observed that Lady Jane, occupied at the
end of the table, had not caught Vereker's words.

I rather avoided him after dinner, for I confess he struck me as cruelly
conceited, and the revelation was a pain.  "The usual twaddle"--my acute
little study!  That one's admiration should have had a reserve or two
could gall him to that point!  I had thought him placid, and he was
placid enough; such a surface was the hard polished glass that encased
the bauble of his vanity.  I was really ruffled, and the only comfort was
that if nobody saw anything George Corvick was quite as much out of it as
I.  This comfort however was not sufficient, after the ladies had
dispersed, to carry me in the proper manner--I mean in a spotted jacket
and humming an air--into the smoking-room.  I took my way in some
dejection to bed; but in the passage I encountered Mr. Vereker, who had
been up once more to change, coming out of his room.  _He_ was humming an
air and had on a spotted jacket, and as soon as he saw me his gaiety gave
a start.

"My dear young man," he exclaimed, "I'm so glad to lay hands on you!  I'm
afraid I most unwittingly wounded you by those words of mine at dinner to
Miss Poyle.  I learned but half an hour ago from Lady Jane that you're
the author of the little notice in _The Middle_."

I protested that no bones were broken; but he moved with me to my own
door, his hand, on my shoulder, kindly feeling for a fracture; and on
hearing that I had come up to bed he asked leave to cross my threshold
and just tell me in three words what his qualification of my remarks had
represented.  It was plain he really feared I was hurt, and the sense of
his solicitude suddenly made all the difference to me.  My cheap review
fluttered off into space, and the best things I had said in it became
flat enough beside the brilliancy of his being there.  I can see him
there still, on my rug, in the firelight and his spotted jacket, his fine
clear face all bright with the desire to be tender to my youth.  I don't
know what he had at first meant to say, but I think the sight of my
relief touched him, excited him, brought up words to his lips from far
within.  It was so these words presently conveyed to me something that,
as I afterwards knew, he had never uttered to any one.  I've always done
justice to the generous impulse that made him speak; it was simply
compunction for a snub unconsciously administered to a man of letters in
a position inferior to his own, a man of letters moreover in the very act
of praising him.  To make the thing right he talked to me exactly as an
equal and on the ground of what we both loved best.  The hour, the place,
the unexpectedness deepened the impression: he couldn't have done
anything more intensely effective.




CHAPTER III.


"I DON'T quite know how to explain it to you," he said, "but it was the
very fact that your notice of my book had a spice of intelligence, it was
just your exceptional sharpness, that produced the feeling--a very old
story with me, I beg you to believe--under the momentary influence of
which I used in speaking to that good lady the words you so naturally
resent.  I don't read the things in the newspapers unless they're thrust
upon me as that one was--it's always one's best friend who does it!  But
I used to read them sometimes--ten years ago.  I dare say they were in
general rather stupider then; at any rate it always struck me they missed
my little point with a perfection exactly as admirable when they patted
me on the back as when they kicked me in the shins.  Whenever since I've
happened to have a glimpse of them they were still blazing away--still
missing it, I mean, deliciously.  _You_ miss it, my dear fellow, with
inimitable assurance; the fact of your being awfully clever and your
article's being awfully nice doesn't make a hair's breadth of difference.
It's quite with you rising young men," Vereker laughed, "that I feel most
what a failure I am!"

I listened with keen interest; it grew keener as he talked.  "_You_ a
failure--heavens!  What then may your 'little point' happen to be?"

"Have I got to _tell_ you, after all these years and labours?"  There was
something in the friendly reproach of this--jocosely exaggerated--that
made me, as an ardent young seeker for truth, blush to the roots of my
hair.  I'm as much in the dark as ever, though I've grown used in a sense
to my obtuseness; at that moment, however, Vereker's happy accent made me
appear to myself, and probably to him, a rare dunce.  I was on the point
of exclaiming "Ah yes, don't tell me: for my honour, for that of the
craft, don't!" when he went on in a manner that showed he had read my
thought and had his own idea of the probability of our some day redeeming
ourselves.  "By my little point I mean--what shall I call it?--the
particular thing I've written my books most _for_.  Isn't there for every
writer a particular thing of that sort, the thing that most makes him
apply himself, the thing without the effort to achieve which he wouldn't
write at all, the very passion of his passion, the part of the business
in which, for him, the flame of art burns most intensely?  Well, it's
_that_!"

I considered a moment--that is I followed at a respectful distance,
rather gasping.  I was fascinated--easily, you'll say; but I wasn't going
after all to be put off my guard.  "Your description's certainly
beautiful, but it doesn't make what you describe very distinct."

"I promise you it would be distinct if it should dawn on you at all."  I
saw that the charm of our topic overflowed for my companion into an
emotion as lively as my own.  "At any rate," he went on, "I can speak for
myself: there's an idea in my work without which I wouldn't have given a
straw for the whole job.  It's the finest fullest intention of the lot,
and the application of it has been, I think, a triumph of patience, of
ingenuity.  I ought to leave that to somebody else to say; but that
nobody does say it is precisely what we're talking about.  It stretches,
this little trick of mine, from book to book, and everything else,
comparatively, plays over the surface of it.  The order, the form, the
texture of my books will perhaps some day constitute for the initiated a
complete representation of it.  So it's naturally the thing for the
critic to look for.  It strikes me," my visitor added, smiling, "even as
the thing for the critic to find."

This seemed a responsibility indeed.  "You call it a little trick?"

"That's only my little modesty.  It's really an exquisite scheme."

"And you hold that you've carried the scheme out?"

"The way I've carried it out is the thing in life I think a bit well of
myself for."

I had a pause.  "Don't you think you ought--just a trifle--to assist the
critic?"

"Assist him?  What else have I done with every stroke of my pen?  I've
shouted my intention in his great blank face!"  At this, laughing out
again, Vereker laid his hand on my shoulder to show the allusion wasn't
to my personal appearance.

"But you talk about the initiated.  There must therefore, you see, _be_
initiation."

"What else in heaven's name is criticism supposed to be?"  I'm afraid I
coloured at this too; but I took refuge in repeating that his account of
his silver lining was poor in something or other that a plain man knows
things by.  "That's only because you've never had a glimpse of it," he
returned.  "If you had had one the element in question would soon have
become practically all you'd see.  To me it's exactly as palpable as the
marble of this chimney.  Besides, the critic just _isn't_ a plain man: if
he were, pray, what would he be doing in his neighbour's garden?  You're
anything but a plain man yourself, and the very raison d'etre of you all
is that you're little demons of subtlety.  If my great affair's a secret,
that's only because it's a secret in spite of itself--the amazing event
has made it one.  I not only never took the smallest precaution to keep
it so, but never dreamed of any such accident.  If I had I shouldn't in
advance have had the heart to go on.  As it was, I only became aware
little by little, and meanwhile I had done my work."

"And now you quite like it?" I risked.

"My work?"

"Your secret.  It's the same thing."

"Your guessing that," Vereker replied, "is a proof that you're as clever
as I say!"  I was encouraged by this to remark that he would clearly be
pained to part with it, and he confessed that it was indeed with him now
the great amusement of life.  "I live almost to see if it will ever be
detected."  He looked at me for a jesting challenge; something far within
his eyes seemed to peep out.  "But I needn't worry--it won't!"

"You fire me as I've never been fired," I declared; "you make me
determined to do or die."  Then I asked: "Is it a kind of esoteric
message?"

His countenance fell at this--he put out his hand as if to bid me
good-night.  "Ah my dear fellow, it can't be described in cheap
journalese!"

I knew of course he'd be awfully fastidious, but our talk had made me
feel how much his nerves were exposed.  I was unsatisfied--I kept hold of
his hand.  "I won't make use of the expression then," I said, "in the
article in which I shall eventually announce my discovery, though I dare
say I shall have hard work to do without it.  But meanwhile, just to
hasten that difficult birth, can't you give a fellow a clue?"  I felt
much more at my ease.

"My whole lucid effort gives him the clue--every page and line and
letter.  The thing's as concrete there as a bird in a cage, a bait on a
hook, a piece of cheese in a mouse-trap.  It's stuck into every volume as
your foot is stuck into your shoe.  It governs every line, it chooses
every word, it dots every i, it places every comma."

I scratched my head.  "Is it something in the style or something in the
thought?  An element of form or an element of feeling?"

He indulgently shook my hand again, and I felt my questions to be crude
and my distinctions pitiful.  "Good-night, my dear boy--don't bother
about it.  After all, you do like a fellow."

"And a little intelligence might spoil it?" I still detained him.

He hesitated.  "Well, you've got a heart in your body.  Is that an
element of form or an element of feeling?  What I contend that nobody has
ever mentioned in my work is the organ of life."

"I see--it's some idea _about_ life, some sort of philosophy.  Unless it
be," I added with the eagerness of a thought perhaps still happier, "some
kind of game you're up to with your style, something you're after in the
language.  Perhaps it's a preference for the letter P!" I ventured
profanely to break out.  "Papa, potatoes, prunes--that sort of thing?"
He was suitably indulgent: he only said I hadn't got the right letter.
But his amusement was over; I could see he was bored.  There was
nevertheless something else I had absolutely to learn.  "Should you be
able, pen in hand, to state it clearly yourself--to name it, phrase it,
formulate it?"

"Oh," he almost passionately sighed, "if I were only, pen in hand, one of
_you_ chaps!"

"That would be a great chance for you of course.  But why should you
despise us chaps for not doing what you can't do yourself?"

"Can't do?"  He opened his eyes.  "Haven't I done it in twenty volumes?
I do it in my way," he continued.  "Go _you_ and don't do it in yours."

"Ours is so devilish difficult," I weakly observed.

"So's mine.  We each choose our own.  There's no compulsion.  You won't
come down and smoke?"

"No.  I want to think this thing out."

"You'll tell me then in the morning that you've laid me bare?"

"I'll see what I can do; I'll sleep on it.  But just one word more," I
added.  We had left the room--I walked again with him a few steps along
the passage.  "This extraordinary 'general intention,' as you call
it--for that's the most vivid description I can induce you to make of
it--is then, generally, a sort of buried treasure?"

His face lighted.  "Yes, call it that, though it's perhaps not for me to
do so."

"Nonsense!" I laughed.  "You know you're hugely proud of it."

"Well, I didn't propose to tell you so; but it _is_ the joy of my soul!"

"You mean it's a beauty so rare, so great?"

He waited a little again.  "The loveliest thing in the world!"  We had
stopped, and on these words he left me; but at the end of the corridor,
while I looked after him rather yearningly, he turned and caught sight of
my puzzled face.  It made him earnestly, indeed I thought quite
anxiously, shake his head and wave his finger "Give it up--give it up!"

This wasn't a challenge--it was fatherly advice.  If I had had one of his
books at hand I'd have repeated my recent act of faith--I'd have spent
half the night with him.  At three o'clock in the morning, not sleeping,
remembering moreover how indispensable he was to Lady Jane, I stole down
to the library with a candle.  There wasn't, so far as I could discover,
a line of his writing in the house.




CHAPTER IV.


RETURNING to town I feverishly collected them all; I picked out each in
its order and held it up to the light.  This gave me a maddening month,
in the course of which several things took place.  One of these, the
last, I may as well immediately mention, was that I acted on Vereker's
advice: I renounced my ridiculous attempt.  I could really make nothing
of the business; it proved a dead loss.  After all I had always, as he
had himself noted, liked him; and what now occurred was simply that my
new intelligence and vain preoccupation damaged my liking.  I not only
failed to run a general intention to earth, I found myself missing the
subordinate intentions I had formerly enjoyed.  His books didn't even
remain the charming things they had been for me; the exasperation of my
search put me out of conceit of them.  Instead of being a pleasure the
more they became a resource the less; for from the moment I was unable to
follow up the author's hint I of course felt it a point of honour not to
make use professionally of my knowledge of them.  I _had_ no
knowledge--nobody had any.  It was humiliating, but I could bear it--they
only annoyed me now.  At last they even bored me, and I accounted for my
confusion--perversely, I allow--by the idea that Vereker had made a fool
of me.  The buried treasure was a bad joke, the general intention a
monstrous pose.

The great point of it all is, however, that I told George Corvick what
had befallen me and that my information had an immense effect upon him.
He had at last come back, but so, unfortunately, had Mrs. Erme, and there
was as yet, I could see, no question of his nuptials.  He was immensely
stirred up by the anecdote I had brought from Bridges; it fell in so
completely with the sense he had had from the first that there was more
in Vereker than met the eye.  When I remarked that the eye seemed what
the printed page had been expressly invented to meet he immediately
accused me of being spiteful because I had been foiled.  Our commerce had
always that pleasant latitude.  The thing Vereker had mentioned to me was
exactly the thing he, Corvick, had wanted me to speak of in my review.
On my suggesting at last that with the assistance I had now given him he
would doubtless be prepared to speak of it himself he admitted freely
that before doing this there was more he must understand.  What he would
have said, had he reviewed the new book, was that there was evidently in
the writer's inmost art something to _be_ understood.  I hadn't so much
as hinted at that: no wonder the writer hadn't been flattered!  I asked
Corvick what he really considered he meant by his own supersubtlety, and,
unmistakeably kindled, he replied: "It isn't for the vulgar--it isn't for
the vulgar!"  He had hold of the tail of something; he would pull hard,
pull it right out.  He pumped me dry on Vereker's strange confidence and,
pronouncing me the luckiest of mortals, mentioned half a dozen questions
he wished to goodness I had had the gumption to put.  Yet on the other
hand he didn't want to be told too much--it would spoil the fun of seeing
what would come.  The failure of _my_ fun was at the moment of our
meeting not complete, but I saw it ahead, and Corvick saw that I saw it.
I, on my side, saw likewise that one of the first things he would do
would be to rush off with my story to Gwendolen.

On the very day after my talk with him I was surprised by the receipt of
a note from Hugh Vereker, to whom our encounter at Bridges had been
recalled, as he mentioned, by his falling, in a magazine, on some article
to which my signature was attached.  "I read it with great pleasure," he
wrote, "and remembered under its influence our lively conversation by
your bedroom fire.  The consequence of this has been that I begin to
measure the temerity of my having saddled you with a knowledge that you
may find something of a burden.  Now that the fit's over I can't imagine
how I came to be moved so much beyond my wont.  I had never before
mentioned, no matter in what state of expansion, the fact of my little
secret, and I shall never speak of that mystery again.  I was
accidentally so much more explicit with you than it had ever entered into
my game to be, that I find this game--I mean the pleasure of playing
it--suffers considerably.  In short, if you can understand it, I've
rather spoiled my sport.  I really don't want to give anybody what I
believe you clever young men call the tip.  That's of course a selfish
solicitude, and I name it to you for what it may be worth to you.  If
you're disposed to humour me don't repeat my revelation.  Think me
demented--it's your right; but don't tell anybody why."

The sequel to this communication was that as early on the morrow as I
dared I drove straight to Mr. Vereker's door.  He occupied in those years
one of the honest old houses in Kensington Square.  He received me
immediately, and as soon as I came in I saw I hadn't lost my power to
minister to his mirth.  He laughed out at sight of my face, which
doubtless expressed my perturbation.  I had been indiscreet--my
compunction was great.  "I _have_ told somebody," I panted, "and I'm sure
that person will by this time have told somebody else!  It's a woman,
into the bargain."

"The person you've told?"

"No, the other person.  I'm quite sure he must have told her."

"For all the good it will do her--or do _me_!  A woman will never find
out."

"No, but she'll talk all over the place: she'll do just what you don't
want."

Vereker thought a moment, but wasn't so disconcerted as I had feared: he
felt that if the harm was done it only served him right.  "It doesn't
matter--don't worry."

"I'll do my best, I promise you, that your talk with me shall go no
further."

"Very good; do what you can."

"In the meantime," I pursued, "George Corvick's possession of the tip
may, on his part, really lead to something."

"That will be a brave day."

I told him about Corvick's cleverness, his admiration, the intensity of
his interest in my anecdote; and without making too much of the
divergence of our respective estimates mentioned that my friend was
already of opinion that he saw much further into a certain affair than
most people.  He was quite as fired as I had been at Bridges.  He was
moreover in love with the young lady: perhaps the two together would
puzzle something out.

Vereker seemed struck with this.  "Do you mean they're to be married?"

"I dare say that's what it will come to."

"That may help them," he conceded, "but we must give them time!"

I spoke of my own renewed assault and confessed my difficulties;
whereupon he repeated his former advice: "Give it up, give it up!"  He
evidently didn't think me intellectually equipped for the adventure.  I
stayed half an hour, and he was most good-natured, but I couldn't help
pronouncing him a man of unstable moods.  He had been free with me in a
mood, he had repented in a mood, and now in a mood he had turned
indifferent.  This general levity helped me to believe that, so far as
the subject of the tip went, there wasn't much in it.  I contrived
however to make him answer a few more questions about it, though he did
so with visible impatience.  For himself, beyond doubt, the thing we were
all so blank about was vividly there.  It was something, I guessed, in
the primal plan, something like a complex figure in a Persian carpet.  He
highly approved of this image when I used it, and he used another
himself.  "It's the very string," he said, "that my pearls are strung
on!"  The reason of his note to me had been that he really didn't want to
give us a grain of succour--our density was a thing too perfect in its
way to touch.  He had formed the habit of depending on it, and if the
spell was to break it must break by some force of its own.  He comes back
to me from that last occasion--for I was never to speak to him again--as
a man with some safe preserve for sport.  I wondered as I walked away
where he had got _his_ tip.




CHAPTER V.


WHEN I spoke to George Corvick of the caution I had received he made me
feel that any doubt of his delicacy would be almost an insult.  He had
instantly told Gwendolen, but Gwendolen's ardent response was in itself a
pledge of discretion.  The question would now absorb them and would offer
them a pastime too precious to be shared with the crowd.  They appeared
to have caught instinctively at Vereker's high idea of enjoyment.  Their
intellectual pride, however, was not such as to make them indifferent to
any further light I might throw on the affair they had in hand.  They
were indeed of the "artistic temperament," and I was freshly struck with
my colleague's power to excite himself over a question of art.  He'd call
it letters, he'd call it life, but it was all one thing.  In what he said
I now seemed to understand that he spoke equally for Gwendolen, to whom,
as soon as Mrs. Erme was sufficiently better to allow her a little
leisure, he made a point of introducing me.  I remember our going
together one Sunday in August to a huddled house in Chelsea, and my
renewed envy of Corvick's possession of a friend who had some light to
mingle with his own.  He could say things to her that I could never say
to him.  She had indeed no sense of humour and, with her pretty way of
holding her head on one side, was one of those persons whom you want, as
the phrase is, to shake, but who have learnt Hungarian by themselves.
She conversed perhaps in Hungarian with Corvick; she had remarkably
little English for his friend.  Corvick afterwards told me that I had
chilled her by my apparent indisposition to oblige them with the detail
of what Vereker had said to me.  I allowed that I felt I had given
thought enough to that indication: hadn't I even made up my mind that it
was vain and would lead nowhere?  The importance they attached to it was
irritating and quite envenomed my doubts.

That statement looks unamiable, and what probably happened was that I
felt humiliated at seeing other persons deeply beguiled by an experiment
that had brought me only chagrin.  I was out in the cold while, by the
evening fire, under the lamp, they followed the chase for which I myself
had sounded the horn.  They did as I had done, only more deliberately and
sociably--they went over their author from the beginning.  There was no
hurry, Corvick said the future was before them and the fascination could
only grow; they would take him page by page, as they would take one of
the classics, inhale him in slow draughts and let him sink all the way
in.  They would scarce have got so wound up, I think, if they hadn't been
in love: poor Vereker's inner meaning gave them endless occasion to put
and to keep their young heads together.  None the less it represented the
kind of problem for which Corvick had a special aptitude, drew out the
particular pointed patience of which, had he lived, he would have given
more striking and, it is to be hoped, more fruitful examples.  He at
least was, in Vereker's words, a little demon of subtlety.  We had begun
by disputing, but I soon saw that without my stirring a finger his
infatuation would have its bad hours.  He would bound off on false scents
as I had done--he would clap his hands over new lights and see them blown
out by the wind of the turned page.  He was like nothing, I told him, but
the maniacs who embrace some bedlamitical theory of the cryptic character
of Shakespeare.  To this he replied that if we had had Shakespeare's own
word for his being cryptic he would at once have accepted it.  The case
there was altogether different--we had nothing but the word of Mr.
Snooks.  I returned that I was stupefied to see him attach such
importance even to the word of Mr. Vereker.  He wanted thereupon to know
if I treated Mr. Vereker's word as a lie.  I wasn't perhaps prepared, in
my unhappy rebound, to go so far as that, but I insisted that till the
contrary was proved I should view it as too fond an imagination.  I
didn't, I confess, say--I didn't at that time quite know--all I felt.
Deep down, as Miss Erme would have said, I was uneasy, I was expectant.
At the core of my disconcerted state--for my wonted curiosity lived in
its ashes--was the sharpness of a sense that Corvick would at last
probably come out somewhere.  He made, in defence of his credulity, a
great point of the fact that from of old, in his study of this genius, he
had caught whiffs and hints of he didn't know what, faint wandering notes
of a hidden music.  That was just the rarity, that was the charm: it
fitted so perfectly into what I reported.

If I returned on several occasions to the little house in Chelsea I dare
say it was as much for news of Vereker as for news of Miss Erme's ailing
parent.  The hours spent there by Corvick were present to my fancy as
those of a chessplayer bent with a silent scowl, all the lamplit winter,
over his board and his moves.  As my imagination filled it out the
picture held me fast.  On the other side of the table was a ghostlier
form, the faint figure of an antagonist good-humouredly but a little
wearily secure--an antagonist who leaned back in his chair with his hands
in his pockets and a smile on his fine clear face.  Close to Corvick,
behind him, was a girl who had begun to strike me as pale and wasted and
even, on more familiar view, as rather handsome, and who rested on his
shoulder and hung on his moves.  He would take up a chessman and hold it
poised a while over one of the little squares, and then would put it back
in its place with a long sigh of disappointment.  The young lady, at
this, would slightly but uneasily shift her position and look across,
very hard, very long, very strangely, at their dim participant.  I had
asked them at an early stage of the business if it mightn't contribute to
their success to have some closer communication with him.  The special
circumstances would surely be held to have given me a right to introduce
them.  Corvick immediately replied that he had no wish to approach the
altar before he had prepared the sacrifice.  He quite agreed with our
friend both as to the delight and as to the honour of the chase--he would
bring down the animal with his own rifle.  When I asked him if Miss Erme
were as keen a shot he said after thinking: "No, I'm ashamed to say she
wants to set a trap.  She'd give anything to see him; she says she
requires another tip.  She's really quite morbid about it.  But she must
play fair--she _shan't_ see him!" he emphatically added.  I wondered if
they hadn't even quarrelled a little on the subject--a suspicion not
corrected by the way he more than once exclaimed to me: "She's quite
incredibly literary, you know--quite fantastically!"  I remember his
saying of her that she felt in italics and thought in capitals.  "Oh when
I've run him to earth," he also said, "then, you know, I shall knock at
his door.  Rather--I beg you to believe.  I'll have it from his own lips:
'Right you are, my boy; you've done it this time!'  He shall crown me
victor--with the critical laurel."

Meanwhile he really avoided the chances London life might have given him
of meeting the distinguished novelist; a danger, however, that
disappeared with Vereker's leaving England for an indefinite absence, as
the newspapers announced--going to the south for motives connected with
the health of his wife, which had long kept her in retirement.  A
year--more than a year--had elapsed since the incident at Bridges, but I
had had no further sight of him.  I think I was at bottom rather
ashamed--I hated to remind him that, though I had irremediably missed his
point, a reputation for acuteness was rapidly overtaking me.  This
scruple led me a dance; kept me out of Lady Jane's house, made me even
decline, when in spite of my bad manners she was a second time so good as
to make me a sign, an invitation to her beautiful seat.  I once became
aware of her under Vereker's escort at a concert, and was sure I was seen
by them, but I slipped out without being caught.  I felt, as on that
occasion I splashed along in the rain, that I couldn't have done anything
else; and yet I remember saying to myself that it was hard, was even
cruel.  Not only had I lost the books, but I had lost the man himself:
they and their author had been alike spoiled for me.  I knew too which
was the loss I most regretted.  I had taken to the man still more than I
had ever taken to the books.




CHAPTER VI.


SIX months after our friend had left England George Corvick, who made his
living by his pen, contracted for a piece of work which imposed on him an
absence of some length and a journey of some difficulty, and his
undertaking of which was much of a surprise to me.  His brother-in-law
had become editor of a great provincial paper, and the great provincial
paper, in a fine flight of fancy, had conceived the idea of sending a
"special commissioner" to India.  Special commissioners had begun, in the
"metropolitan press," to be the fashion, and the journal in question must
have felt it had passed too long for a mere country cousin.  Corvick had
no hand, I knew, for the big brush of the correspondent, but that was his
brother-in-law's affair, and the fact that a particular task was not in
his line was apt to be with himself exactly a reason for accepting it.
He was prepared to out-Herod the metropolitan press; he took solemn
precautions against priggishness, he exquisitely outraged taste.  Nobody
ever knew it--that offended principle was all his own.  In addition to
his expenses he was to be conveniently paid, and I found myself able to
help him, for the usual fat book, to a plausible arrangement with the
usual fat publisher.  I naturally inferred that his obvious desire to
make a little money was not unconnected with the prospect of a union with
Gwendolen Erme.  I was aware that her mother's opposition was largely
addressed to his want of means and of lucrative abilities, but it so
happened that, on my saying the last time I saw him something that bore
on the question of his separation from our young lady, he brought out
with an emphasis that startled me: "Ah I'm not a bit engaged to her, you
know!"

"Not overtly," I answered, "because her mother doesn't like you.  But
I've always taken for granted a private understanding."

"Well, there _was_ one.  But there isn't now."  That was all he said save
something about Mrs. Erme's having got on her feet again in the most
extraordinary way--a remark pointing, as I supposed, the moral that
private understandings were of little use when the doctor didn't share
them.  What I took the liberty of more closely inferring was that the
girl might in some way have estranged him.  Well, if he had taken the
turn of jealousy for instance it could scarcely be jealousy of me.  In
that case--over and above the absurdity of it--he wouldn't have gone away
just to leave us together.  For some time before his going we had
indulged in no allusion to the buried treasure, and from his silence,
which my reserve simply emulated, I had drawn a sharp conclusion.  His
courage had dropped, his ardour had gone the way of mine--this appearance
at least he left me to scan.  More than that he couldn't do; he couldn't
face the triumph with which I might have greeted an explicit admission.
He needn't have been afraid, poor dear, for I had by this time lost all
need to triumph.  In fact I considered I showed magnanimity in not
reproaching him with his collapse, for the sense of his having thrown up
the game made me feel more than ever how much I at last depended on him.
If Corvick had broken down I should never know; no one would be of any
use if _he_ wasn't.  It wasn't a bit true I had ceased to care for
knowledge; little by little my curiosity not only had begun to ache
again, but had become the familiar torment of my days and my nights.
There are doubtless people to whom torments of such an order appear
hardly more natural than the contortions of disease; but I don't after
all know why I should in this connexion so much as mention them.  For the
few persons, at any rate, abnormal or not, with whom my anecdote is
concerned, literature was a game of skill, and skill meant courage, and
courage meant honour, and honour meant passion, meant life.  The stake on
the table was of a special substance and our roulette the revolving mind,
but we sat round the green board as intently as the grim gamblers at
Monte Carlo.  Gwendolen Erme, for that matter, with her white face and
her fixed eyes, was of the very type of the lean ladies one had met in
the temples of chance.  I recognised in Corvick's absence that she made
this analogy vivid.  It was extravagant, I admit, the way she lived for
the art of the pen.  Her passion visibly preyed on her, and in her
presence I felt almost tepid.  I got hold of "Deep Down" again: it was a
desert in which she had lost herself, but in which too she had dug a
wonderful hole in the sand--a cavity out of which Corvick had still more
remarkably pulled her.

Early in March I had a telegram from her, in consequence of which I
repaired immediately to Chelsea, where the first thing she said to me
was: "He has got it, he has got it!"

She was moved, as I could see, to such depths that she must mean the
great thing.  "Vereker's idea?"

"His general intention.  George has cabled from Bombay."

She had the missive open there; it was emphatic though concise.  "Eureka.
Immense."  That was all--he had saved the cost of the signature.  I
shared her emotion, but I was disappointed.  "He doesn't say what it is."

"How could he--in a telegram?  He'll write it."

"But how does he know?"

"Know it's the real thing?  Oh I'm sure that when you see it you do know.
Vera incessu patuit dea!"

"It's you, Miss Erme, who are a 'dear' for bringing me such news!"--I
went all lengths in my high spirits.  "But fancy finding our goddess in
the temple of Vishnu!  How strange of George to have been able to go into
the thing again in the midst of such different and such powerful
solicitations!"

"He hasn't gone into it, I know; it's the thing itself, let severely
alone for six months, that has simply sprung out at him like a tigress
out of the jungle.  He didn't take a book with him--on purpose; indeed he
wouldn't have needed to--he knows every page, as I do, by heart.  They
all worked in him together, and some day somewhere, when he wasn't
thinking, they fell, in all their superb intricacy, into the one right
combination.  The figure in the carpet came out.  That's the way he knew
it would come and the real reason--you didn't in the least understand,
but I suppose I may tell you now--why he went and why I consented to his
going.  We knew the change would do it--that the difference of thought,
of scene, would give the needed touch, the magic shake.  We had
perfectly, we had admirably calculated.  The elements were all in his
mind, and in the secousse of a new and intense experience they just
struck light."  She positively struck light herself--she was literally,
facially luminous.  I stammered something about unconscious cerebration,
and she continued: "He'll come right home--this will bring him."

"To see Vereker, you mean?"

"To see Vereker--and to see _me_.  Think what he'll have to tell me!"

I hesitated.  "About India?"

"About fiddlesticks!  About Vereker--about the figure in the carpet."

"But, as you say, we shall surely have that in a letter."

She thought like one inspired, and I remembered how Corvick had told me
long before that her face was interesting.  "Perhaps it can't be got into
a letter if it's 'immense.'"

"Perhaps not if it's immense bosh.  If he has hold of something that
can't be got into a letter he hasn't hold of _the_ thing.  Vereker's own
statement to me was exactly that the 'figure' _would_ fit into a letter."

"Well, I cabled to George an hour ago--two words," said Gwendolen.

"Is it indiscreet of me to ask what they were?"

She hung fire, but at last brought them out.  "'Angel, write.'"

"Good!" I exclaimed.  "I'll make it sure--I'll send him the same."




CHAPTER VII.


MY words however were not absolutely the same--I put something instead of
"angel"; and in the sequel my epithet seemed the more apt, for when
eventually we heard from our traveller it was merely, it was thoroughly
to be tantalised.  He was magnificent in his triumph, he described his
discovery as stupendous; but his ecstasy only obscured it--there were to
be no particulars till he should have submitted his conception to the
supreme authority.  He had thrown up his commission, he had thrown up his
book, he had thrown up everything but the instant need to hurry to
Rapallo, on the Genoese shore, where Vereker was making a stay.  I wrote
him a letter which was to await him at Aden--I besought him to relieve my
suspense.  That he had found my letter was indicated by a telegram which,
reaching me after weary days and in the absence of any answer to my
laconic dispatch to him at Bombay, was evidently intended as a reply to
both communications.  Those few words were in familiar French, the French
of the day, which Covick often made use of to show he wasn't a prig.  It
had for some persons the opposite effect, but his message may fairly be
paraphrased.  "Have patience; I want to see, as it breaks on you, the
face you'll make!"  "Tellement envie de voir ta tete!"--that was what I
had to sit down with.  I can certainly not be said to have sat down, for
I seem to remember myself at this time as rattling constantly between the
little house in Chelsea and my own.  Our impatience, Gwendolen's and
mine, was equal, but I kept hoping her light would be greater.  We all
spent during this episode, for people of our means, a great deal of money
in telegrams and cabs, and I counted on the receipt of news from Rapallo
immediately after the junction of the discoverer with the discovered.
The interval seemed an age, but late one day I heard a hansom
precipitated to my door with the crash engendered by a hint of
liberality.  I lived with my heart in my mouth and accordingly bounded to
the window--a movement which gave me a view of a young lady erect on the
footboard of the vehicle and eagerly looking up at my house.  At sight of
me she flourished a paper with a movement that brought me straight down,
the movement with which, in melodramas, handkerchiefs and reprieves are
flourished at the foot of the scaffold.

"Just seen Vereker--not a note wrong.  Pressed me to bosom--keeps me a
month."  So much I read on her paper while the cabby dropped a grin from
his perch.  In my excitement I paid him profusely and in hers she
suffered it; then as he drove away we started to walk about and talk.  We
had talked, heaven knows, enough before, but this was a wondrous lift.
We pictured the whole scene at Rapallo, where he would have written,
mentioning my name, for permission to call; that is _I_ pictured it,
having more material than my companion, whom I felt hang on my lips as we
stopped on purpose before shop-windows we didn't look into.  About one
thing we were clear: if he was staying on for fuller communication we
should at least have a letter from him that would help us through the
dregs of delay.  We understood his staying on, and yet each of us saw, I
think, that the other hated it.  The letter we were clear about arrived;
it was for Gwendolen, and I called on her in time to save her the trouble
of bringing it to me.  She didn't read it out, as was natural enough; but
she repeated to me what it chiefly embodied.  This consisted of the
remarkable statement that he'd tell her after they were married exactly
what she wanted to know.

"Only _then_, when I'm his wife--not before," she explained.  "It's
tantamount to saying--isn't it?--that I must marry him straight off!"
She smiled at me while I flushed with disappointment, a vision of fresh
delay that made me at first unconscious of my surprise.  It seemed more
than a hint that on me as well he would impose some tiresome condition.
Suddenly, while she reported several more things from his letter, I
remembered what he had told me before going away.  He had found Mr.
Vereker deliriously interesting and his own possession of the secret a
real intoxication.  The buried treasure was all gold and gems.  Now that
it was there it seemed to grow and grow before him; it would have been,
through all time and taking all tongues, one of the most wonderful
flowers of literary art.  Nothing, in especial, once you were face to
face with it, could show for more consummately _done_.  When once it came
out it came out, was there with a splendour that made you ashamed; and
there hadn't been, save in the bottomless vulgarity of the age, with
every one tasteless and tainted, every sense stopped, the smallest reason
why it should have been overlooked.  It was great, yet so simple, was
simple, yet so great, and the final knowledge of it was an experience
quite apart.  He intimated that the charm of such an experience, the
desire to drain it, in its freshness, to the last drop, was what kept him
there close to the source.  Gwendolen, frankly radiant as she tossed me
these fragments, showed the elation of a prospect more assured than my
own.  That brought me back to the question of her marriage, prompted me
to ask if what she meant by what she had just surprised me with was that
she was under an engagement.

"Of course I am!" she answered.  "Didn't you know it?"  She seemed
astonished, but I was still more so, for Corvick had told me the exact
contrary.  I didn't mention this, however; I only reminded her how little
I had been on that score in her confidence, or even in Corvick's, and
that, moreover I wasn't in ignorance of her mother's interdict.  At
bottom I was troubled by the disparity of the two accounts; but after a
little I felt Corvick's to be the one I least doubted.  This simply
reduced me to asking myself if the girl had on the spot improvised an
engagement--vamped up an old one or dashed off a new--in order to arrive
at the satisfaction she desired.  She must have had resources of which I
was destitute, but she made her case slightly more intelligible by
returning presently: "What the state of things has been is that we felt
of course bound to do nothing in mamma's lifetime."

"But now you think you'll just dispense with mamma's consent?"

"Ah it mayn't come to that!"  I wondered what it might come to, and she
went on: "Poor dear, she may swallow the dose.  In fact, you know," she
added with a laugh, "she really _must_!"--a proposition of which, on
behalf of every one concerned, I fully acknowledged the force.




CHAPTER VIII.


NOTHING more vexatious had ever happened to me than to become aware
before Corvick's arrival in England that I shouldn't be there to put him
through.  I found myself abruptly called to Germany by the alarming
illness of my younger brother, who, against my advice, had gone to Munich
to study, at the feet indeed of a great master, the art of portraiture in
oils.  The near relative who made him an allowance had threatened to
withdraw it if he should, under specious pretexts, turn for superior
truth to Paris--Paris being somehow, for a Cheltenham aunt, the school of
evil, the abyss.  I deplored this prejudice at the time, and the deep
injury of it was now visible--first in the fact that it hadn't saved the
poor boy, who was clever, frail and foolish, from congestion of the
lungs, and second in the greater break with London to which the event
condemned me.  I'm afraid that what was uppermost in my mind during
several anxious weeks was the sense that if we had only been in Paris I
might have run over to see Corvick.  This was actually out of the
question from every point of view: my brother, whose recovery gave us
both plenty to do, was ill for three months, during which I never left
him and at the end of which we had to face the absolute prohibition of a
return to England.  The consideration of climate imposed itself, and he
was in no state to meet it alone.  I took him to Meran and there spent
the summer with him, trying to show him by example how to get back to
work and nursing a rage of another sort that I tried _not_ to show him.

The whole business proved the first of a series of phenomena so strangely
interlaced that, taken together--which was how I had to take them--they
form as good an illustration as I can recall of the manner in which, for
the good of his soul doubtless, fate sometimes deals with a man's
avidity.  These incidents certainly had larger bearings than the
comparatively meagre consequence we are here concerned with--though I
feel that consequence also a thing to speak of with some respect.  It's
mainly in such a light, I confess, at any rate, that the ugly fruit of my
exile is at this hour present to me.  Even at first indeed the spirit in
which my avidity, as I have called it, made me regard that term owed no
element of ease to the fact that before coming back from Rapallo George
Corvick addressed me in a way I objected to.  His letter had none of the
sedative action I must to-day profess myself sure he had wished to give
it, and the march of occurrences was not so ordered as to make up for
what it lacked.  He had begun on the spot, for one of the quarterlies, a
great last word on Vereker's writings, and this exhaustive study, the
only one that would have counted, have existed, was to turn on the new
light, to utter--oh, so quietly!--the unimagined truth.  It was in other
words to trace the figure in the carpet through every convolution, to
reproduce it in every tint.  The result, according to my friend, would be
the greatest literary portrait ever painted, and what he asked of me was
just to be so good as not to trouble him with questions till he should
hang up his masterpiece before me.  He did me the honour to declare that,
putting aside the great sitter himself, all aloft in his indifference, I
was individually the connoisseur he was most working for.  I was
therefore to be a good boy and not try to peep under the curtain before
the show was ready: I should enjoy it all the more if I sat very still.

I did my best to sit very still, but I couldn't help giving a jump on
seeing in _The Times_, after I had been a week or two in Munich and
before, as I knew, Corvick had reached London, the announcement of the
sudden death of poor Mrs. Erme.  I instantly, by letter, appealed to
Gwendolen for particulars, and she wrote me that her mother had yielded
to long-threatened failure of the heart.  She didn't say, but I took the
liberty of reading into her words, that from the point of view of her
marriage and also of her eagerness, which was quite a match for mine,
this was a solution more prompt than could have been expected and more
radical than waiting for the old lady to swallow the dose.  I candidly
admit indeed that at the time--for I heard from her repeatedly--I read
some singular things into Gwendolen's words and some still more
extraordinary ones into her silences.  Pen in hand, this way, I live the
time over, and it brings back the oddest sense of my having been, both
for months and in spite of myself, a kind of coerced spectator.  All my
life had taken refuge in my eyes, which the procession of events appeared
to have committed itself to keep astare.  There were days when I thought
of writing to Hugh Vereker and simply throwing myself on his charity.
But I felt more deeply that I hadn't fallen quite so low--besides which,
quite properly, he would send me about my business.  Mrs. Erme's death
brought Corvick straight home, and within the month he was united "very
quietly"--as quietly, I seemed to make out, as he meant in his article to
bring out his trouvaille--to the young lady he had loved and quitted.  I
use this last term, I may parenthetically say, because I subsequently
grew sure that at the time he went to India, at the time of his great
news from Bombay, there had been no positive pledge between them
whatever.  There had been none at the moment she was affirming to me the
very opposite.  On the other hand he had certainly become engaged the day
he returned.  The happy pair went down to Torquay for their honeymoon,
and there, in a reckless hour, it occurred to poor Corvick to take his
young bride a drive.  He had no command of that business: this had been
brought home to me of old in a little tour we had once made together in a
dogcart.  In a dogcart he perched his companion for a rattle over
Devonshire hills, on one of the likeliest of which he brought his horse,
who, it was true, had bolted, down with such violence that the occupants
of the cart were hurled forward and that he fell horribly on his head.
He was killed on the spot; Gwendolen escaped unhurt.

I pass rapidly over the question of this unmitigated tragedy, of what the
loss of my best friend meant for me, and I complete my little history of
my patience and my pain by the frank statement of my having, in a
postscript to my very first letter to her after the receipt of the
hideous news, asked Mrs. Corvick whether her husband mightn't at least
have finished the great article on Vereker.  Her answer was as prompt as
my question: the article, which had been barely begun, was a mere
heartbreaking scrap.  She explained that our friend, abroad, had just
settled down to it when interrupted by her mother's death, and that then,
on his return, he had been kept from work by the engrossments into which
that calamity was to plunge them.  The opening pages were all that
existed; they were striking, they were promising, but they didn't unveil
the idol.  That great intellectual feat was obviously to have formed his
climax.  She said nothing more, nothing to enlighten me as to the state
of her own knowledge--the knowledge for the acquisition of which I had
fancied her prodigiously acting.  This was above all what I wanted to
know: had _she_ seen the idol unveiled?  Had there been a private
ceremony for a palpitating audience of one?  For what else but that
ceremony had the nuptials taken place?  I didn't like as yet to press
her, though when I thought of what had passed between us on the subject
in Corvick's absence her reticence surprised me.  It was therefore not
till much later, from Meran, that I risked another appeal, risked it in
some trepidation, for she continued to tell me nothing.  "Did you hear in
those few days of your blighted bliss," I wrote, "what we desired so to
hear?"  I said, "we," as a little hint and she showed me she could take a
little hint; "I heard everything," she replied, "and I mean to keep it to
myself!"




CHAPTER IX.


IT was impossible not to be moved with the strongest sympathy for her,
and on my return to England I showed her every kindness in my power.  Her
mother's death had made her means sufficient, and she had gone to live in
a more convenient quarter.  But her loss had been great and her
visitation cruel; it never would have occurred to me moreover to suppose
she could come to feel the possession of a technical tip, of a piece of
literary experience, a counterpoise to her grief.  Strange to say, none
the less, I couldn't help believing after I had seen her a few times that
I caught a glimpse of some such oddity.  I hasten to add that there had
been other things I couldn't help believing, or at least imagining; and
as I never felt I was really clear about these, so, as to the point I
here touch on, I give her memory the benefit of the doubt.  Stricken and
solitary, highly accomplished and now, in her deep mourning, her maturer
grace and her uncomplaining sorrow, incontestably handsome, she presented
herself as leading a life of singular dignity and beauty.  I had at first
found a way to persuade myself that I should soon get the better of the
reserve formulated, the week after the catastrophe in her reply to an
appeal as to which I was not unconscious that it might strike her as
mistimed.  Certainly that reserve was something of a shock to
me--certainly it puzzled me the more I thought of it and even though I
tried to explain it (with moments of success) by an imputation of exalted
sentiments, of superstitious scruples, of a refinement of loyalty.
Certainly it added at the same time hugely to the price of Vereker's
secret, precious as this mystery already appeared.  I may as well confess
abjectly that Mrs. Corvick's unexpected attitude was the final tap on the
nail that was to fix fast my luckless idea, convert it into the obsession
of which I'm for ever conscious.

But this only helped me the more to be artful, to be adroit, to allow
time to elapse before renewing my suit.  There were plenty of
speculations for the interval, and one of them was deeply absorbing.
Corvick had kept his information from his young friend till after the
removal of the last barrier to their intimacy--then only had he let the
cat out of the bag.  Was it Gwendolen's idea, taking a hint from him, to
liberate this animal only on the basis of the renewal of such a relation?
Was the figure in the carpet traceable or describable only for husbands
and wives--for lovers supremely united?  It came back to me in a
mystifying manner that in Kensington Square, when I mentioned that
Corvick would have told the girl he loved, some word had dropped from
Vereker that gave colour to this possibility.  There might be little in
it, but there was enough to make me wonder if I should have to marry Mrs.
Corvick to get what I wanted.  Was I prepared to offer her this price for
the blessing of her knowledge?  Ah that way madness lay!--so I at least
said to myself in bewildered hours.  I could see meanwhile the torch she
refused to pass on flame away in her chamber of memory--pour through her
eyes a light that shone in her lonely house.  At the end of six months I
was fully sure of what this warm presence made up to her for.  We had
talked again and again of the man who had brought us together--of his
talent, his character, his personal charm, his certain career, his
dreadful doom, and even of his clear purpose in that great study which
was to have been a supreme literary portrait, a kind of critical Vandyke
or Velasquez.  She had conveyed to me in abundance that she was
tongue-tied by her perversity, by her piety, that she would never break
the silence it had not been given to the "right person," as she said, to
break.  The hour however finally arrived.  One evening when I had been
sitting with her longer than usual I laid my hand firmly on her arm.
"Now at last what _is_ it?"

She had been expecting me and was ready.  She gave a long slow soundless
headshake, merciful only in being inarticulate.  This mercy didn't
prevent its hurling at me the largest finest coldest "Never!" I had yet,
in the course of a life that had known denials, had to take full in the
face.  I took it and was aware that with the hard blow the tears had come
into my eyes.  So for a while we sat and looked at each other; after
which I slowly rose, I was wondering if some day she would accept me; but
this was not what I brought out.  I said as I smoothed down my hat: "I
know what to think then.  It's nothing!"

A remote disdainful pity for me gathered in her dim smile; then she spoke
in a voice that I hear at this hour: "It's my _life_!"  As I stood at the
door she added: "You've insulted him!"

"Do you mean Vereker?"

"I mean the Dead!"

I recognised when I reached the street the justice of her charge.  Yes,
it was her life--I recognised that too; but her life none the less made
room with the lapse of time for another interest.  A year and a half
after Corvick's death she published in a single volume her second novel,
"Overmastered," which I pounced on in the hope of finding in it some
tell-tale echo or some peeping face.  All I found was a much better book
than her younger performance, showing I thought the better company she
had kept.  As a tissue tolerably intricate it was a carpet with a figure
of its own; but the figure was not the figure I was looking for.  On
sending a review of it to _The Middle_ I was surprised to learn from the
office that a notice was already in type.  When the paper came out I had
no hesitation in attributing this article, which I thought rather
vulgarly overdone, to Drayton Deane, who in the old days had been
something of a friend of Corvick's, yet had only within a few weeks made
the acquaintance of his widow.  I had had an early copy of the book, but
Deane had evidently had an earlier.  He lacked all the same the light
hand with which Corvick had gilded the gingerbread--he laid on the tinsel
in splotches.




CHAPTER X.


SIX months later appeared "The Right of Way," the last chance, though we
didn't know it, that we were to have to redeem ourselves.  Written wholly
during Vereker's sojourn abroad, the book had been heralded, in a hundred
paragraphs, by the usual ineptitudes.  I carried it, as early a copy as
any, I this time flattered myself, straightway to Mrs. Corvick.  This was
the only use I had for it; I left the inevitable tribute of _The Middle_
to some more ingenious mind and some less irritated temper.  "But I
already have it," Gwendolen said.  "Drayton Deane was so good as to bring
it to me yesterday, and I've just finished it."

"Yesterday?  How did he get it so soon?"

"He gets everything so soon!  He's to review it in _The Middle_."

"He--Drayton Deane--review Vereker?"  I couldn't believe my ears.

"'Why not?  One fine ignorance is as good as another."

I winced but I presently said: "You ought to review him yourself!"

"I don't 'review,'" she laughed.  "I'm reviewed!"

Just then the door was thrown open.  "Ah yes, here's your reviewer!"
Drayton Deane was there with his long legs and his tall forehead: he had
come to see what she thought of "The Right of Way," and to bring news
that was singularly relevant.  The evening papers were just out with a
telegram on the author of that work, who, in Rome, had been ill for some
days with an attack of malarial fever.  It had at first not been thought
grave, but had taken, in consequence of complications, a turn that might
give rise to anxiety.  Anxiety had indeed at the latest hour begun to be
felt.

I was struck in the presence of these tidings with the fundamental
detachment that Mrs. Corvick's overt concern quite failed to hide: it
gave me the measure of her consummate independence.  That independence
rested on her knowledge, the knowledge which nothing now could destroy
and which nothing could make different.  The figure in the carpet might
take on another twist or two, but the sentence had virtually been
written.  The writer might go down to his grave: she was the person in
the world to whom--as if she had been his favoured heir--his continued
existence was least of a need.  This reminded me how I had observed at a
particular moment--after Corvick's death--the drop of her desire to see
him face to face.  She had got what she wanted without that.  I had been
sure that if she hadn't got it she wouldn't have been restrained from the
endeavour to sound him personally by those superior reflexions, more
conceivable on a man's part than on a woman's, which in my case had
served an a deterrent.  It wasn't however, I hasten to add, that my case,
in spite of this invidious comparison, wasn't ambiguous enough.  At the
thought that Vereker was perhaps at that moment dying there rolled over
me a wave of anguish--a poignant sense of how inconsistently I still
depended on him.  A delicacy that it was my one compensation to suffer to
rule me had left the Alps and the Apennines between us, but the sense of
the waning occasion suggested that I might in my despair at last have
gone to him.  Of course I should really have done nothing of the sort.  I
remained five minutes, while my companions talked of the new book, and
when Drayton Deane appealed to me for my opinion of it I made answer,
getting up, that I detested Hugh Vereker and simply couldn't read him.  I
departed with the moral certainty that as the door closed behind me Deane
would brand me for awfully superficial.  His hostess wouldn't contradict
_that_ at least.

I continue to trace with a briefer touch our intensely odd successions.
Three weeks after this came Vereker's death, and before the year was out
the death of his wife.  That poor lady I had never seen, but I had had a
futile theory that, should she survive him long enough to be decorously
accessible, I might approach her with the feeble flicker of my plea.  Did
she know and if she knew would she speak?  It was much to be presumed
that for more reasons than one she would have nothing to say; but when
she passed out of all reach I felt renannouncement indeed my appointed
lot.  I was shut up in my obsession for ever--my gaolers had gone off
with the key.  I find myself quite as vague as a captive in a dungeon
about the tinge that further elapsed before Mrs. Corvick became the wife
of Drayton Deane.  I had foreseen, through my bars, this end of the
business, though there was no indecent haste and our friendship had
fallen rather off.  They were both so "awfully intellectual" that it
struck people as a suitable match, but I had measured better than any one
the wealth of understanding the bride would contribute to the union.
Never, for a marriage in literary circles--so the newspapers described
the alliance--had a lady been so bravely dowered.  I began with due
promptness to look for the fruit of the affair--that fruit, I mean, of
which the premonitory symptoms would be peculiarly visible in the
husband.  Taking for granted the splendour of the other party's nuptial
gift, I expected to see him make a show commensurate with his increase of
means.  I knew what his means had been--his article on "The Right of Way"
had distinctly given one the figure.  As he was now exactly in the
position in which still more exactly I was not I watched from month to
month, in the likely periodicals, for the heavy message poor Corvick had
been unable to deliver and the responsibility of which would have fallen
on his successor.  The widow and wife would have broken by the rekindled
hearth the silence that only a widow and wife might break, and Deane
would be as aflame with the knowledge as Corvick in his own hour, as
Gwendolen in hers, had been.  Well, he was aflame doubtless, but the fire
was apparently not to become a public blaze.  I scanned the periodicals
in vain: Drayton Deane filled them with exuberant pages, but he withheld
the page I most feverishly sought.  He wrote on a thousand subjects, but
never on the subject of Vereker.  His special line was to tell truths
that other people either "funked," as he said, or overlooked, but he
never told the only truth that seemed to me in these days to signify.  I
met the couple in those literary circles referred to in the papers: I
have sufficiently intimated that it was only in such circles we were all
constructed to revolve.  Gwendolen was more than ever committed to them
by the publication of her third novel, and I myself definitely classed by
holding the opinion that this work was inferior to its immediate
predecessor.  Was it worse because she had been keeping worse company?
If her secret was, as she had told me, her life--a fact discernible in
her increasing bloom, an air of conscious privilege that, cleverly
corrected by pretty charities, gave distinction to her appearance--it had
yet not a direct influence on her work.  That only made one--everything
only made one--yearn the more for it; only rounded it off with a mystery
finer and subtler.




CHAPTER XI.


IT was therefore from her husband I could never remove my eyes: I beset
him in a manner that might have made him uneasy.  I went even so far as
to engage him in conversation.  Didn't he know, hadn't he come into it as
a matter of course?--that question hummed in my brain.  Of course he
knew; otherwise he wouldn't return my stare so queerly.  His wife had
told him what I wanted and he was amiably amused at my impotence.  He
didn't laugh--he wasn't a laugher: his system was to present to my
irritation, so that I should crudely expose myself, a conversational
blank as vast as his big bare brow.  It always happened that I turned
away with a settled conviction from these unpeopled expanses, which
seemed to complete each other geographically and to symbolise together
Drayton Deane's want of voice, want of form.  He simply hadn't the art to
use what he knew; he literally was incompetent to take up the duty where
Corvick had left it.  I went still further--it was the only glimpse of
happiness I had.  I made up my mind that the duty didn't appeal to him.
He wasn't interested, he didn't care.  Yes, it quite comforted me to
believe him too stupid to have joy of the thing I lacked.  He was as
stupid after as he had been before, and that deepened for me the golden
glory in which the mystery was wrapped.  I had of course none the less to
recollect that his wife might have imposed her conditions and exactions.
I had above all to remind myself that with Vereker's death the major
incentive dropped.  He was still there to be honoured by what might be
done--he was no longer there to give it his sanction.  Who alas but he
had the authority?

Two children were born to the pair, but the second cost the mother her
life.  After this stroke I seemed to see another ghost of a chance.  I
jumped at it in thought, but I waited a certain time for manners, and at
last my opportunity arrived in a remunerative way.  His wife had been
dead a year when I met Drayton Deane in the smoking-room of a small club
of which we both were members, but where for months--perhaps because I
rarely entered it--I hadn't seen him.  The room was empty and the
occasion propitious.  I deliberately offered him, to have done with the
matter for ever, that advantage for which I felt he had long been
looking.

"As an older acquaintance of your late wife's than even you were," I
began, "you must let me say to you something I have on my mind.  I shall
be glad to make any terms with you that you see fit to name for the
information she must have had from George Corvick--the information you
know, that had come to him, poor chap, in one of the happiest hours of
his life, straight from Hugh Vereker."

He looked at me like a dim phrenological bust.  "The information--?"

"Vereker's secret, my dear man--the general intention of his books: the
string the pearls were strung on, the buried treasure, the figure in the
carpet."

He began to flush--the numbers on his bumps to come out.  "Vereker's
books had a general intention?"

I stared in my turn.  "You don't mean to say you don't know it?"  I
thought for a moment he was playing with me.  "Mrs. Deane knew it; she
had it, as I say, straight from Corvick, who had, after infinite search
and to Vereker's own delight, found the very mouth of the cave.  Where
_is_ the mouth?  He told after their marriage--and told alone--the person
who, when the circumstances were reproduced, must have told you.  Have I
been wrong in taking for granted that she admitted you, as one of the
highest privileges of the relation in which you stood to her, to the
knowledge of which she was after Corvick's death the sole depositary?
All I know is that that knowledge is infinitely precious, and what I want
you to understand is that if you'll in your turn admit me to it you'll do
me a kindness for which I shall be lastingly grateful."

He had turned at last very red; I dare say he had begun by thinking I had
lost my wits.  Little by little he followed me; on my own side I stared
with a livelier surprise.  Then he spoke. "I don't know what you're
talking about."

He wasn't acting--it was the absurd truth.

"She _didn't_ tell you--?"

"Nothing about Hugh Vereker."

I was stupefied; the room went round.  It had been too good even for
that!  "Upon your honour?"

"Upon my honour.  What the devil's the matter with you?" he growled.

"I'm astounded--I'm disappointed.  I wanted to get it out of you."

"It isn't in me!" he awkwardly laughed.  "And even if it were--"

"If it were you'd let me have it--oh yes, in common humanity.  But I
believe you.  I see--I see!" I went on, conscious, with the full turn of
the wheel, of my great delusion, my false view of the poor man's
attitude.  What I saw, though I couldn't say it, was that his wife hadn't
thought him worth enlightening.  This struck me as strange for a woman
who had thought him worth marrying.  At last I explained it by the
reflexion that she couldn't possibly have married him for his
understanding.  She had married him for something else.

He was to some extent enlightened now, but he was even more astonished,
more disconcerted: he took a moment to compare my story with his
quickened memories.  The result of his meditation was his presently
saying with a good deal of rather feeble form: "This is the first I hear
of what you allude to.  I think you must be mistaken as to Mrs. Drayton
Deane's having had any unmentioned, and still less any unmentionable,
knowledge of Hugh Vereker.  She'd certainly have wished it--should it
have borne on his literary character--to be used."

"It was used.  She used it herself.  She told me with her own lips that
she 'lived' on it."

I had no sooner spoken than I repented of my words; he grew so pale that
I felt as if I had struck him.  "Ah, 'lived'--!" he murmured, turning
short away from me.

My compunction was real; I laid my hand on his shoulder.  "I beg you to
forgive me--I've made a mistake.  You don't know what I thought you knew.
You could, if I had been right, have rendered me a service; and I had my
reasons for assuming that you'd be in a position to meet me."

"Your reasons?" he asked.  "What were your reasons?"

I looked at him well; I hesitated; I considered.  "Come and sit down with
me here, and I'll tell you."  I drew him to a sofa, I lighted another
cigar and, beginning with the anecdote of Vereker's one descent from the
clouds, I recited to him the extraordinary chain of accidents that had,
in spite of the original gleam, kept me till that hour in the dark.  I
told him in a word just what I've written out here.  He listened with
deepening attention, and I became aware, to my surprise, by his
ejaculations, by his questions, that he would have been after all not
unworthy to be trusted by his wife.  So abrupt an experience of her want
of trust had now a disturbing effect on him; but I saw the immediate
shock throb away little by little and then gather again into waves of
wonder and curiosity--waves that promised, I could perfectly judge, to
break in the end with the fury of my own highest tides.  I may say that
to-day as victims of unappeased desire there isn't a pin to choose
between us.  The poor man's state is almost my consolation; there are
really moments when I feel it to be quite my revenge.

                                * * * * *

                                PRINTED BY
                          KNIGHT'S WEST NORWOOD




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIGURE IN THE CARPET***


******* This file should be named 645.txt or 645.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/4/645



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
