Project Gutenberg's The Life and Death of Cormac the Skald, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Life and Death of Cormac the Skald
       Anonymous Icelandic Epic, 1250-1300 A.D., Although Parts
       may be Based on a now Lost 12th Century Saga

Author: Unknown

Translator: W.G. Collingwood and J. Stefansson

Release Date: July 3, 2008 [EBook #265]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE AND DEATH OF CORMAC ***




Produced by Doublas B. Killings





LIFE AND DEATH OF CORMAC THE SKALD

By Unknown Author


Originally written in Icelandic sometime between 1250 - 1300 A.D.
although parts may be based on a now lost 12th century saga.

Translation by W.G. Collingwood & J. Stefansson (Ulverston, 1901).





CHAPTER ONE. Cormac's Fore-Elders.

Harald Fairhair was king of Norway when this tale begins. There was a
chief in the kingdom in those days and his name was Cormac; one of the
Vik-folk by kindred, a great man of high birth. He was the mightiest of
champions, and had been with King Harald in many battles.

He had a son called Ogmund, a very hopeful lad; big and sturdy even as a
child; who when he was grown of age and come to his full strength, took
to sea-roving in summer and served in the king's household in winter. So
he earned for himself a good name and great riches.

One summer he went roving about the British Isles and there he fell in
with a man named Asmund Ashenside, who also was a great champion and had
worsted many vikings and men of war. These two heard tell of one another
and challenges passed between them. They came together and fought.
Asmund had the greater following, but he withheld some of his men from
the battle: and so for the length of four days they fought, until many
of Asmund's people were fallen, and at last he himself fled. Ogmund won
the victory and came home again with wealth and worship.

His father said that he could get no greater glory in war,--"And now,"
said he, "I will find thee a wife. What sayest thou to Helga, daughter
of Earl Frodi?"

"So be it," said Ogmund.

Upon this they set off to Earl Frodi's house, and were welcomed with all
honour. They made known their errand, and he took it kindly, although
he feared that the fight with Asmund was likely to bring trouble.
Nevertheless this match was made, and then they went their ways home.
A feast was got ready for the wedding and to that feast a very great
company came together.

Helga the daughter of Earl Frodi had a nurse that was a wise woman, and
she went with her. Now Asmund the viking heard of this marriage, and set
out to meet Ogmund. He bade him fight, and Ogmund agreed.

Helga's nurse used to touch men when they went to fight: so she did with
Ogmund before he set out from home, and told him that he would not be
hurt much.

Then they both went to the fighting holm and fought. The viking laid
bare his side, but the sword would not bite upon it. Then Ogmund whirled
about his sword swiftly and shifted it from hand to hand, and hewed
Asmund's leg from under him: and three marks of gold he took to let him
go with his life.




CHAPTER TWO. How Cormac Was Born and Bred.

About this time King Harald Fairhair died, and Eric Bloodaxe reigned in
his stead. Ogmund would have no friendship with Eric, nor with Gunnhild,
and made ready his ship for Iceland.

Nor Ogmund and Helga had a son called Frodi: but when the ship was
nearly ready, Helga took a sickness and died; and so did their son
Frodi.

After that, they sailed to sea. When they were near the land, Ogmund
cast overboard his high-seat-pillars; and where the high-seat-pillars
had already been washed ashore, there they cast anchor, and landed in
Midfiord.

At this time Skeggi of Midfiord ruled the countryside. He came riding
toward them and bade them welcome into the firth, and gave them the
pick of the land: which Ogmund took, and began to mark out ground for
a house. Now it was a belief of theirs that as the measuring went, so
would the luck go: if the measuring-wand seemed to grow less when they
tried it again and again, so would that house's luck grow less: and if
it grew greater, so would the luck be. This time the measure always grew
less, though they tried it three times over.

So Ogmund built him a house on the sandhills, and lived there ever
after. He married Dalla, the daughter of Onund the Seer, and their sons
were Thorgils and Cormac. Cormac was dark-haired, with a curly lock upon
his forehead: he was bright of blee and somewhat like his mother, big
and strong, and his mood was rash and hasty. Thorgils was quiet and easy
to deal with.

When the brothers were grown up, Ogmund died; and Dalla kept house with
her sons. Thorgils worked the farm, under the eye of Midfiord-Skeggi.




CHAPTER THREE. How Cormac Fell In Love.

There was a man named Thorkel lived at Tunga (Tongue). He was a wedded
man, and had a daughter called Steingerd who was fostered in Gnupsdal
(Knipedale).

Now it was one autumn that a whale came ashore at Vatnsnes (Watsness),
and it belonged to the brothers, Dalla's sons. Thorgils asked Cormac
would he rather go shepherding on the fell, or work at the whale. He
chose to fare on the fell with the house-carles.

Tosti, the foreman, it was should be master of the sheep-gathering: so
he and Cormac went together until they came to Gnupsdal. It was night:
there was a great hall, and fires for men to sit at.

That evening Steingerd came out of her bower, and a maid with her. Said
the maid, "Steingerd mine, let us look at the guests."

"Nay," she said, "no need": and yet went to the door, and stepped on the
threshold, and spied across the gate. Now there was a space between the
wicker and the threshold, and her feet showed through. Cormac saw that,
and made this song:--

                    (1)
     "At the door of my soul she is standing,
     So sweet in the gleam of her garment:
     Her footfall awakens a fury,
     A fierceness of love that I knew not,
     Those feet of a wench in her wimple,
     Their weird is my sorrow and troubling,
     --Or naught may my knowledge avail me--
     Both now and for aye to endure."

Then Steingerd knew she was seen. She turned aside into a corner
where the likeness of Hagbard was carved on the wall, and peeped under
Hagbard's beard. Then the firelight shone upon her face.

"Cormac," said Tosti, "seest eyes out yonder by that head of Hagbard?"

Cormac answered in song:--

                    (2)
     "There breaks on me, burning upon me,
     A blaze from the cheeks of a maiden,
     --I laugh not to look on the vision--
     In the light of the hall by the doorway.
     So sweet and so slender I deem her,
     Though I spy bug a glimpse of an ankle
     By the threshold:--and through me there flashes
     A thrill that shall age never more."

And then he made another song:--

                    (3)
     "The moon of her brow, it is beaming
     'Neath the bright-litten heaven of her forehead:
     So she gleams in her white robe, and gazes
     With a glance that is keen as the falcon's.
     But the star that is shining upon me
     What spell shall it work by its witchcraft?
     Ah, that moon of her brow shall be mighty
     With mischief to her--and to me?"

Said Tosti, "She is fairly staring at thee!"--And he answered:--

                    (4)
     "She's a ring-bedight oak of the ale-cup,
     And her eyes never left me unhaunted.
     The strife in my heart I could hide not,
     For I hold myself bound in her bondage.
     O gay in her necklet, and gainer
     In the game that wins hearts on her chessboard,--
     When she looked at me long from the doorway
     Where the likeness of Hagbard is carved."

Then the girls went into the hall, and sat down. He heard what they said
about his looks,--the maid, that he was black and ugly, and Steingerd,
that he was handsome and everyway as best could be,--"There is only
one blemish," said she, "his hair is tufted on his forehead:"--and he
said:--

                    (5)
     "One flaw in my features she noted
     --With the flame of the wave she was gleaming
     All white in the wane of the twilight--
     And that one was no hideous blemish.
     So highborn, so haughty a lady
     --I should have such a dame to befriend me:
     But she trows me uncouth for a trifle,
     For a tuft in the hair on my brow!"

Said the maid, "Black are his eyes, sister, and that becomes him not."
Cormac heard her, and said in verse:--

                    (6)
     "Yes, black are the eyes that I bring ye,
     O brave in your jewels, and dainty.
     But a draggle-tail, dirty-foot slattern
     Would dub me ill-favoured and sallow.
     Nay, many a maiden has loved me,
     Thou may of the glittering armlet:
     For I've tricks of the tongue to beguile them
     And turn them from handsomer lads."

At this house they spent the night. In the morning when Cormac rose up,
he went to a trough and washed himself; then he went into the ladies'
bower and saw nobody there, but heard folk talking in the inner room,
and he turned and entered. There was Steingerd, and women with her.

Said the maid to Steingerd, "There comes thy bonny man, Steingerd."

"Well, and a fine-looking lad he is," said she.

Now she was combing her hair, and Cormac asked her, "Wilt thou give me
leave?"

She reached out her comb for him to handle it. She had the finest hair
of any woman. Said the maid, "Ye would give a deal for a wife with hair
like Steingerd's, or such eyes!"

He answered:--

                    (7)
     "One eye of the far of the ale-horn
     Looking out of a form so bewitching,
     Would a bridegroom count money to buy it
     He must bring for it ransom three hundred.
     The curls that she combs of a morning,
     White-clothed in fair linen and spotless,
     They enhance the bright hoard of her value,--
     Five hundred might barely redeem them!"

Said the maid, "It's give and take with the two of ye! But thou'lt put a
big price upon the whole of her!" He answered:--

                    (8)
     "The tree of my treasure and longing,
     It would take this whole Iceland to win her:
     She is dearer than far-away Denmark,
     And the doughty domain of the Hun-folk.
     With the gold she is combing, I count her
     More costly than England could ransom:
     So witty, so wealthy, my lady
     Is worth them,--and Ireland beside!"

Then Tosti came in, and called Cormac out to some work or other; but he
said:--

                    (9)
     "Take my swift-footed steel for thy tiding,
     Ay, and stint not the lash to him, Tosti:
     On the desolate downs ye may wander
     And drive him along till he weary.
     I care not o'er mountain and moorland
     The murrey-brown weathers to follow,--
     Far liefer, I'd linger the morning
     In long, cosy chatter with Steingerd."

Tosti said he would find it a merrier game, and went off; so Cormac sat
down to chess, and right gay he was. Steingerd said he talked better
than folk told of; and he sat there all the day; and then he made this
song:--

                    (10)
     "'Tis the dart that adorneth her tresses,
     The deep, dewy grass of her forehead.
     So kind to my keeping she gave it,
     That good comb I shall ever remember!
     A stranger was I when I sought her
     --Sweet stem with the dragon's hoard shining--"
     With gold like the sea-dazzle gleaming--
     The girl I shall never forget."

Tosti came off the fell and they fared home. After that Cormac used to
go to Gnupsdal often to see Steingerd: and he asked his mother to make
him good clothes, so that Steingerd might like him the most that could
be. Dalla said there was a mighty great difference betwixt them, and it
was far from certain to end happily if Thorkel at Tunga got to know.




CHAPTER FOUR. How Cormac Liked Black-Puddings.

Well Thorkel soon heard what was going forward, and thought it would
turn out to his own shame and his daughter's if Cormac would not pledge
himself to take her or leave her. So he sent for Steingerd, and she went
home.

Thorkel had a man called Narfi, a noisy, foolish fellow, boastful, and
yet of little account. Said he to Thorkel, "If Cormac's coming likes
thee not, I can soon settle it."

"Very well," says Thorkel.

Now, in the autumn, Narfi's work it was to slaughter the sheep. Once,
when Cormac came to Tunga, he saw Steingerd in the kitchen. Narfi stood
by the kettle, and when they had finished the boiling, he took up a
black-pudding and thrust it under Cormac's nose, crying:--

                    (11)
     "Cormac, how would ye relish one?
     Kettle-worms I call them."

To which he answered:--

                    (12)
     "Black-puddings boiled, quoth Ogmund's son,
     Are a dainty,--fair befall them!"

And in the evening when Cormac made ready to go home he saw Narfi, and
bethought him of those churlish words. "I think, Narfi," said he, "I am
more like to knock thee down, than thou to rule my coming and going."
And with that struck him an axe-hammer-blow, saying:--

                    (13)
     "Why foul with thy clowning and folly,
     The food that is dressed for thy betters?
     Thou blundering archer, what ails thee
     To be aiming thy insults at me?"

And he made another song about:--

                    (14)
     "He asked me, the clavering cowherd
     If I cared for--what was it he called them?--
     The worms of the kettle.  I warrant
     He'll be wiping his eyes by the hearth-stone.
     I deem that yon knave of the dunghill
     Who dabbles the muck on the meadow
     --Yon rook in his mud-spattered raiment--
     Got a rap for his noise--like a dog."




CHAPTER FIVE. They Waylay Cormac: And The Witch Curses Him.

There was a woman named Thorveig, and she knew a deal too much. She
lived at Steins-stadir (Stonestead) in Midfiord, and had two sons; the
elder was Odd, and the younger Gudmund. They were great braggarts both
of them.

This Odd often came to see Thorkel at Tunga, and used to sit and
talk with Steingerd. Thorkel made a great show of friendship with the
brothers, and egged them on to waylay Cormac. Odd said it was no more
than he could do.

So one day when Cormac came to Tunga, Steingerd was in the parlour and
sat on the dais. Thorveig's sons sat in the room, ready to fall upon him
when he came in; and Thorkel had put a drawn sword on one side of the
door, and on the other side Narfi had put a scythe in its shaft. When
Cormac came to the hall-door the scythe fell down and met the sword, and
broke a great notch in it. Out came Thorkel and began to upbraid Cormac
for a rascal, and got fairly wild with his talk: then flung into the
parlour and bade Steingerd out of it. Forth they went by another door,
and he locked her into an outhouse, saying that Cormac and she would
never meet again.

Cormac went in: and he came quicker than folk thought for, and they were
taken aback. He looked about, and no Steingerd: but he saw the brothers
whetting their weapons: so he turned on his heel and went, saying:--

                    (14)
     "The weapon that mows in the meadow
     It met with the gay painted buckler,
     When I came to encounter a goddess
     Who carries the beaker of wine.
     Beware!  for I warn you of evil
     When warriors threaten me mischief.
     It shall not be for nought that I pour ye
     The newly mixed mead of the gods."

And when he could find Steingerd nowhere, he made this song:--

                    (15)
     "She has gone, with the glitter of ocean
     Agleam on her wrist and her bosom,
     And my heart follows hard on her footsteps,
     For the hall is in darkness without her.
     I have gazed, but my glances can pierce not
     The gloom of the desolate dwelling;
     And fierce is my longing to find her,
     The fair one who only can heal me."

After a while he came to the outhouse where Steingerd was, and burst it
open and had talk with her.

"This is madness," cried she, "to come talking with me; for Thorveig's
sons are meant to have thy head."

But he answered:--

                    (16)
     "There wait they within that would snare me;
     There whet they their swords for my slaying.
     My bane they shall be not, the cowards,
     The brood of the churl and the carline.
     Let the twain of them find me and fight me
     In the field, without shelter to shield them,
     And ewes of the sheep should be surer
     To shorten the days of the wolf."

So he sat there all day. By that time Thorkel saw that the plan he had
made was come to nothing; and he bade the sons of Thorveig waylay Cormac
in a dale near his garth. "Narfi shall go with ye two," said he; "but I
will stay at home, and bring you help if need be."

In the evening Cormac set out, and when he came to the dale, he saw
three men, and said in verse:--

                    (17)
     "There sit they in hiding to stay me
     From the sight of my queen of the jewels:
     But rude will their task be to reave me
     From the roof of my bounteous lady.
     The fainer the hatred they harbour
     For him that is free of her doorway,
     The fainer my love and my longing
     For the lass that is sweeter than samphire."

Then leaped up Thorveig's sons, and fought Cormac for a time: Narfi the
while skulked and dodged behind them. Thorkel saw from his house that
they were getting but slowly forward, and he took his weapons. In that
nick of time Steingerd came out and saw what her father meant. She laid
hold on his hands, and he got no nearer to help the brothers. In the end
Odd fell, and Gudmund was so wounded that he died afterwards. Thorkel
saw to them, and Cormac went home.

A little after this Cormac went to Thorveig and said he would have her
no longer live there at the firth. "Thou shalt flit and go thy way at
such a time," said he, "and I will give no blood-money for thy sons."

Thorveig answered, "It is like enough ye can hunt me out of the
countryside, and leave my sons unatoned. But this way I'll reward thee.
Never shalt thou have Steingerd."

Said Cormac, "That's not for thee to make or to mar, thou wicked old
hag!"




CHAPTER SIX. Cormac Wins His Bride and Loses Her.

After this, Cormac went to see Steingerd the same as ever: and once when
they talked over these doings she said no ill of them: whereupon he made
this song:--

                    (18)
     "There sat they in hiding to slay me
     From the sight of my bride and my darling:
     But weak were the feet of my foemen
     When we fought on the island of weapons.
     And the rush of the mightiest rivers
     Shall race from the shore to the mountains
     Or ever I leave thee, my lady,
     And the love that I feast on to-day!"

"Say no such big words about it," answered she; "Many a thing may stand
in the road."

Upon which he said:--

                    (19)
     "O sweet in the sheen of thy raiment,
     The sight of thy beauty is gladdening!
     What man that goes marching to battle,
     What mate wouldst thou choose to be thine?"

And she answered:--

                    (20)
     "O giver of gold, O ring-breaker,
     If the gods and the high fates befriend me,
     I'd pledge me to Frodi's blithe brother
     And bind him that he should be mine."

Then she told him to make friends with her father and get her in
marriage. So for her sake Cormac gave Thorkel good gifts. Afterwards
many people had their say in the matter; but in the end it came to
this,--that he asked for her, and she was pledged to him, and the
wedding was fixed: and so all was quiet for a while.

Then they had words. There was some falling-out about settlements. It
came to such a pass that after everything was ready, Cormac began to
cool off. But the real reason was, that Thorveig had bewitched him so
that they should never have one another.

Thorkel at Tunga had a grown-up son, called Thorkel and by-named
Tooth-gnasher. He had been abroad some time, but this summer he came
home and stayed with his father.

Cormac never came to the wedding at the time it was fixed, and the hour
passed by. This the kinsfolk of Steingerd thought a slight, deeming that
he had broken off the match; and they had much talk about it.




CHAPTER SEVEN. How Steingerd Was Married To Somebody Else.

Bersi lived in the land of Saurbae, a rich man and a good fellow: he was
well to the fore, a fighter, and a champion at the holmgang. He had been
married to Finna the Fair: but she was dead: Asmund was their son,
young in years and early ripe. Helga was the sister of Bersi: she was
unmarried, but a fine woman and a pushing one, and she kept house for
Bersi after Finna died.

At the farm called Muli (the Mull) lived Thord Arndisarson: he was
wedded to Thordis, sister of Bork the Stout. They had two sons who were
both younger than Asmund the son of Bersi.

There was also a man with Vali. His farm was named Vali's stead, and it
stood on the way to Hrutafiord.

Now Thorveig the spaewife went to see Holmgang Bersi and told him her
trouble. She said that Cormac forbade her staying in Midfiord: so Bersi
bought land for her west of the firth, and she lived there for a long
time afterwards.

Once when Thorkel at Tunga and his son were talking about Cormac's
breach of faith and deemed that it should be avenged, Narfi said, "I see
a plan that will do. Let us go to the west-country with plenty of goods
and gear, and come to Bersi in Saurbae. He is wifeless. Let us entangle
him in the matter. He would be a great help to us."

That counsel they took. They journeyed to Saurbae, and Bersi welcomed
them. In the evening they talked of nothing but weddings. Narfi up and
said there was no match so good as Steingerd,--"And a deal of folk say,
Bersi, that she would suit thee."

"I have heard tell," he answered, "that there will be a rift in the
road, though the match is a good one."

"If it's Cormac men fear," cried Narfi, "there is no need; for he is
clean out of the way."

When Bersi heard that, he opened the matter to Thorkel Toothgnasher, and
asked for Steingerd. Thorkel made a good answer, and pledged his sister
to him.

So they rode north, eighteen in all, for the wedding. There was a man
named Vigi lived at Holm, a big man and strong of his hands, a warlock,
and Bersi's kinsman. He went with them, and they thought he would be
a good helper. Thord Arndisarson too went north with Bersi, and many
others, all picked men.

When they came to Thorkel's, they set about the wedding at once, so that
no news of it might get out through the countryside: but all this was
sore against Steingerd's will.

Now Vigi the warlock knew every man's affairs who came to the steading
or left it. He sat outmost in the chamber, and slept by the hall door.

Steingerd sent for Narfi, and when they met she said,--"I wish thee,
kinsman, to tell Cormac the business they are about: I wish thee to take
this message to him."

So he set out secretly; but when he was a gone a little way Vigi came
after, and bade him creep home and hatch no plots. They went back
together, and so the night passed.

Next morning Narfi started forth again; but before he had gone so far as
on the evening, Vigi beset him, and drove him back without mercy.

When the wedding was ended they made ready for their journey. Steingerd
took her gold and jewels, and they rode towards Hrutafiord, going rather
slowly. When they were off, Narfi set out and came to Mel. Cormac was
building a wall, and hammering it with a mallet. Narfi rode up, with his
shield and sword, and carried on strangely, rolling his eyes about like
a hunted beast. Some men were up on the wall with Cormac when he came,
and his horse shied at them. Said Cormac,--"What news, Narfi? What folk
were with you last night?"

"Small tidings, but we had guests enough," answered he.

"Who were the guests?"

"There was Holmgang Bersi, with seventeen more to sit at his wedding."

"Who was the bride?"

"Bersi wed Steingerd Thorkel's daughter," said Narfi. "When they were
gone she sent me here to tell thee the news."

"Thou hast never a word but ill," said Cormac, and leapt upon him and
struck at the shield: and as it slipped aside he was smitten on the
breast and fell from his horse; and the horse ran away with the shield
(hanging to it).

Cormac's brother Thorgils said this was too much. "It serves him right,"
cried Cormac. And when Narfi woke out of his swoon they got speech of
him.

Thorgils asked, "What manner of men were at the wedding?"

Narfi told him.

"Did Steingerd know this before?"

"Not till the very evening they came," answered he; and then told of his
dealings with Vigi, saying that Cormac would find it easier to whistle
on Steingerd's tracks and go on a fool's errand than to fight Bersi.
Then said Cormac:--

                    (21)
     "Now see to thy safety henceforward,
     And stick to thy horse and thy buckler;
     Or this mallet of mine, I can tell thee,
     Will meet with thine ear of a surety.
     Now say no more stories of feasting,
     Though seven in a day thou couldst tell of,
     Or bumps thou shalt comb on thy brainpan,
     Thou that breakest the howes of the dead.

Thorgils asked about the settlements between Bersi and Steingerd. Her
kinsmen, said Narfi, were now quit of all farther trouble about that
business, however it might turn out; but her father and brother would be
answerable for the wedding.




CHAPTER EIGHT. How Cormac Chased Bersi And His Bride.

Cormac took his horse and weapons and saddle-gear.

"What now, brother?" asked Thorgils.

He answered:--

                    (22)
     "My bride, my betrothed has been stolen,
     And Bersi the raider has robbed me.
     I who offer the song-cup of Odin--
     Who else?--should be riding beside her.
     She loved me--no lord of them better:
     I have lost her--for me she is weeping:
     The dear, dainty darling that kissed me,
     For day upon day of delight."

Said Thorgils, "A risky errand is this, for Bersi will get home before
you catch him. And yet I will go with thee."

Cormac said he would away and bide for no man. He leapt on his horse
forthwith, and galloped as hard as he could. Thorgils made haste to
gather men,--they were eighteen in all,--and came up with Cormac on the
hause that leads to Hrutafiord, for he had foundered his horse. So they
turned to Thorveig the spaewife's farmsteading, and found that Bersi was
gone aboard her boat.

She had said to Bersi, "I wish thee to take a little gift from me, and
good luck follow it."

This was a target bound with iron; and she said she reckoned Bersi would
hardly be hurt if he carried it to shield him,--"but it is little worth
beside this steading thou hast given me." He thanked her for the gift,
and so they parted. Then she got men to scuttle all the boats on the
shore, because she knew beforehand that Cormac and his folk were coming.

When they came and asked her for a boat, she said she would do them no
kindness without payment;--"Here is a rotten boat in the boathouse which
I would lend for half a mark."

Thorgils said it would be in reason if she asked two ounces of silver.
Such matters, said Cormac, should not stand in the way; but Thorgils
said he would sooner ride all round the water-head. Nevertheless Cormac
had his will, and they started in the boat; but they had scarcely put
off from shore when it filled, and they had hard work to get back to the
same spot.

"Thou shouldst pay dearly for this, thou wicked old hag," said Cormac,
"and never be paid at all."

That was no mighty trick to play them, she said; and so Thorgils paid
her the silver; about which Cormac made this song:--

                    (23)
     "I'm a tree that is tricked out in war-gear,
     She, the trim rosy elf of the shuttle:
     And I break into singing about her
     Like the bat at the well, never ceasing.
     With the dew-drops of Draupnir the golden
     Full dearly folk buy them their blessings;
     Then lay down three ounces and leave them
     For the leaky old boat that we borrowed."

Bersi got hastily to horse, and rode homewards; and when Cormac saw that
he must be left behind, he made this song:--

                    (24)
     "I tell you, the goddess who glitters
     With gold on the perch of the falcon,
     The bride that I trusted, by beauty,
     From the bield of my hand has been taken.
     On the boat she makes glad in its gliding
     She is gone from me, reft from me, ravished!
     O shame, that we linger to save her,
     Too sweet for the prey of the raven!

They took their horses and rode round the head of the firth. They met
Vali and asked about Bersi; he said that Bersi had come to Muli and
gathered men to him,--"A many men."

"Then we are too late," said Cormac, "if they have got men together."

Thorgils begged Cormac to let them turn back, saying there was little
honour to be got; but Cormac said he must see Steingerd.

So Vali went with them and they came to Muli where Bersi was and many
men with him. They spoke together. Cormac said that Bersi had betrayed
him in carrying off Steingerd, "But now we would take the lady with us,
and make him amends for his honour."

To this said Thord Arndisarson, "We will offer terms to Cormac, but the
lady is in Bersi's hands."

"There is no hope that Steingerd will go with you," said Bersi; "but
I offer my sister to Cormac in marriage, and I reckon he will be well
wedded if take Helga."

"This is a good offer," said Thorgils; "let us think of it, brother."

But Cormac started back like a restive horse.




CHAPTER NINE. Of Another Witch, And Two Magic Swords.

There was a woman called Thordis--and a shrew she was--who lived at
Spakonufell (Spaequean's-fell), in Skagastrand. She, having foresight of
Cormac's goings, came that very day to Muli, and answered this matter on
his behalf, saying, "Never give him yon false woman. She is a fool, and
not fit for any pretty man. Woe will his mother be at such a fate for
her lad!"

"Aroint thee, foul witch!" cried Thord. They should see, said he, that
Helga would turn out fine. But Cormac answered, "Said it may be, for
sooth it may be: I will never think of her."

"Woe to us, then," said Thorgils, "for listening to the words of yon
fiend, and slighting this offer!"

Then spoke Cormac, "I bid thee, Bersi, to the holmgang within half a
month, at Leidholm, in Middal."

Bersi said he would come, but Cormac should be the worse for his choice.

After this Cormac went about the steading to look for Steingerd. When he
found her he said she had betrayed him in marrying another man.

"It was thou that made the first breach, Cormac," said she, "for this
was none of my doing."

Then said he in verse:--

                    (25)
     "Thou sayest my faith has been forfeit,
     O fair in thy glittering raiment;
     But I wearied my steed and outwore it,
     And for what but the love that bare thee?
     O fainer by far was I, lady,
     To founder my horse in the hunting--
     Nay, I spared not the jade when I spurred it--
     Than to see thee the bride of my foe."

After this Cormac and his men went home. When he told his mother how
things had gone, "Little good," she said, "will thy luck do us. Ye have
slighted a fine offer, and you have no chance against Bersi, for he is a
great fighter and he has good weapons."

Now, Bersi owned the sword they call Whitting; a sharp sword it was,
with a life-stone to it; and that sword he had carried in many a fray.

"Whether wilt thou have weapons to meet Whitting?" she asked. Cormac
said he would have an axe both great and keen.

Dalla said he should see Skeggi of Midfiord and ask for the loan of his
sword, Skofnung. So Cormac went to Reykir and told Skeggi how matters
stood, asking him to lend Skofnung. Skeggi said he had no mind to lend
it. Skofnung and Cormac, said he, would never agree: "It is cold and
slow, and thou art hot and hasty."

Cormac rode away and liked it ill. He came home to Mel and told
his mother that Skeggi would not lend the sword. Now Skeggi had the
oversight of Dalla's affairs, and they were great friends; so she said,
"He will lend the sword, though not all at once."

That was not what he wanted, answered Cormac,--"If he withhold it not
from thee, while he does withhold it from me." Upon which she answered
that he was a thwart lad.

A few days afterwards Dalla told him to go to Reykir. "He will lend thee
the sword now," said she. So he sought Skeggi and asked for Skofnung.

"Hard wilt thou find it to handle," said Skeggi. "There is a pouch to
it, and that thou shalt let be. Sun must not shine on the pommel of the
hilt. Thou shalt not wear it until fighting is forward, and when ye come
to the field, sit all alone and then draw it. Hold the edge toward thee,
and blow on it. Then will a little worm creep from under the hilt. Then
slope thou the sword over, and make it easy for that worm to creep back
beneath the hilt."

"Here's a tale of tricks, thou warlock!" cried Cormac

"Nevertheless," answered Skeggi, "it will stand thee in good stead to
know them."

So Cormac rode home and told his mother, saying that her will was of
great avail with Skeggi. He showed the sword, and tried to draw it, but
it would not leave the sheath.

"Thou are over wilful, my son," said she.

Then he set his feet against the hilts, and pulled until he tore the
pouch off, at which Skofnung creaked and groaned, but never came out of
the scabbard.

Well, the time wore on, and the day came. He rode away with fifteen men;
Bersi also rode to the holm with as many. Cormac came there first, and
told Thorgils that he would sit apart by himself. So he sat down and
ungirt the sword.

Now, he never heeded whether the sun shone upon the hilt, for he had
girt the sword on him outside his clothes. And when he tried to draw it
he could not, until he set his feet upon the hilts. Then the little worm
came, and was not rightly done by; and so the sword came groaning and
creaking out of the scabbard, and the good luck of it was gone.




CHAPTER TEN. The Fight On Leidarholm.

After that Cormac went to his men. Bersi and his party had come by that
time, and many more to see the fight.

Cormac took up Bersi's target and cut at it, and sparks flew out.

Then a hide was taken and spread for them to stand on. Bersi spoke and
said, "Thou, Cormac, hast challenged me to the holmgang; instead of
that, I offer thee to fight in simple sword-play. Thou art a young man
and little tried; the holmgang needs craft and cunning, but sword-play,
man to man, is an easy game."

Cormac answered, "I should fight no better even so. I will run the risk,
and stand on equal footing with thee, every way."

"As thou wilt," said Bersi.

It was the law of the holmgang that the hide should be five ells long,
with loops at its corners. Into these should be driven certain pins with
heads to them, called tjosnur. He who made it ready should go to the
pins in such a manner that he could see sky between his legs, holding
the lobes of his ears and speaking the forewords used in the rite called
"The Sacrifice of the tjosnur." Three squares should be marked round
the hide, each one foot broad. At the outermost corners of the squares
should be four poles, called hazels; when this is done, it is a hazelled
field. Each man should have three shields, and when they were cut up
he must get upon the hide if he had given way from it before, and guard
himself with his weapons alone thereafter. He who had been challenged
should strike the first stroke. If one was wounded so that blood fell
upon the hide, he should fight no longer. If either set one foot outside
the hazel poles "he went on his heel," they said; but he "ran" if both
feet were outside. His own man was to hold the shield before each of the
fighters. The one who was wounded should pay three marks of silver to be
set free.

So the hide was taken and spread under their feet. Thorgils held his
brother's shield, and Thord Arndisarson that of Bersi. Bersi struck the
first blow, and cleft Cormac's shield; Cormac struck at Bersi to the
like peril. Each of them cut up and spoilt three shields of the
other's. Then it was Cormac's turn. He struck at Bersi, who parried with
Whitting. Skofnung cut the point off Whitting in front of the ridge. The
sword-point flew upon Cormac's hand, and he was wounded in the thumb.
The joint was cleft, and blood dropped upon the hide. Thereupon folk
went between them and stayed the fight.

Then said Cormac, "This is a mean victory that Bersi has gained; it is
only from my bad luck; and yet we must part."

He flung down his sword, and it met Bersi's target. A shard was broken
out of Skofnung, and fire flew out of Thorveig's gift.

Bersi asked the money for release, Cormac said it would be paid; and so
they parted.




CHAPTER ELEVEN. The Songs That Were Made About The Fight.

Steinar was the name of a man who was the son of Onund the Seer, and
brother of Dalla, Cormac's mother. He was an unpeaceful man, and lived
at Ellidi.

Thither rode Cormac from the holme, to see his kinsman, and told him
of the fight, at which he was but ill pleased. Cormac said he meant to
leave the country,--"And I want thee to take the money to Bersi."

"Thou art no bold man," said Steinar, "but the money shall be paid if
need be."

Cormac was there some nights; his hand swelled much, for it was not
dressed.

After that meeting, Holmgang Bersi went to see his brother. Folk asked
how the holmgang had gone, and when he told them they said that two bold
men had struck small blows, and he had gained the victory only through
Cormac's mishap. When Bersi met Steingerd, and she asked how it went, he
made this verse:--

                    (26)
     "They call him, and truly they tell it,
     A tree of the helmet right noble:
     But the master of manhood must bring me
     Three marks for his ransom and rescue.
     Though stout in the storm of the bucklers
     In the stress of the Valkyrie's tempest
     He will bid me no more to the battle,
     For the best of the struggle was ours."

Steinar and Cormac rode from Ellidi and passed through Saurbae. They saw
men riding towards them, and yonder came Bersi. He greeted Cormac and
asked how the wound was getting on. Cormac said it needed little to be
healed.

"Wilt thou let me heal thee?" said Bersi; "though from me thou didst get
it: and then it will be soon over."

Cormac said nay, for he meant to be his lifelong foe. Then answered
Bersi:--

                    (27)
     "Thou wilt mind thee for many a season
     How we met in the high voice of Hilda.
     Right fain I go forth to the spear-mote
     Being fitted for every encounter.
     There Cormac's gay shield from his clutches
     I clave with the bane of the bucklers,
     For he scorned in the battle to seek me
     If we set not the lists of the holmgang."

Thus they parted; and then Cormac went home to Mel and saw his mother.
She healed his hand; it had become ugly and healed badly. The notch in
Skofnung they whetted, but the more they whetted the bigger it was.
So he went to Reykir, and flung Skofnung at Skeggi's feet, with this
verse:--

                    (28)
     "I bring thee, thus broken and edgeless,
     The blade that thou gavest me, Skeggi!
     I warrant thy weapon could bite not:
     I won not the fight by its witchcraft.
     No gain of its virtue nor glory
     I got in the strife of the weapons,
     When we met for to mingle the sword-storm
     For the maiden my singing adorns."

Said Skeggi, "It went as I warned thee." Cormac flung forth and went
home to Mel: and when he met with Dalla he made this song:--

                    (29)
     "To the field went I forth, O my mother
     The flame of the armlet who guardest,--
     To dare the cave-dweller, my foeman
     And I deemed I should smite him in battle.
     But the brand that is bruited in story
     It brake in my hand as I held it;
     And this that should thrust men to slaughter
     Is thwarted and let of its might.

                    (30)
     For I borrowed to bear in the fighting
     No blunt-edged weapon of Skeggi:
     There is strength in the serpent that quivers
     By the side of the land of the girdle.
     But vain was the virtue of Skofnung
     When he vanquished the sharpness of Whitting;
     And a shard have I shorn, to my sorrow,
     From the shearer of ringleted mail.

                    (31)
     Yon tusker, my foe, wrought me trouble
     When targe upon targe I had carven:
     For the thin wand of slaughter was shattered
     And it sundered the ground of my handgrip.
     Loud bellowed the bear of the sea-king
     When he brake from his lair in the scabbard,
     At the hest of the singer, who seeketh
     The sweet hidden draught of the gods.

                    (32)
     Afar must I fare, O my mother,
     And a fate points the pathway before me,
     For that white-wreathen tree may woo not
     --Two wearisome morrows her outcast.
     And it slays me, at home to be sitting,
     So set is my heart on its goddess,
     As a lawn with fair linen made lovely
     --I can linger no third morrow's morn."

After that, Cormac went one day to Reykir and talked with Skeggi, who
said the holmgang had been brought to scorn. Then answered Cormac:--

                    (33)
     "Forget it, O Frey of the helmet,
     --Lo, I frame thee a song in atonement--
     That the bringer of blood, even Skofnung,
     I bare thee so strangely belated.
     For by stirrers of storm was I wounded;
     They smote me where perches the falcon:
     But the blade that I borrowed, O Skeggi,
     Was borne in the clashing of edges.

                    (34)
     I had deemed, O thou Grey of fighting,
     Of the fierce song of Odin,--my neighbour,
     I had deemed that a brand meet for bloodshed
     I bare to the crossways of slaughter.
     Nay,--thy glaive, it would gape not nor ravin
     Against him, the rover who robbed me:
     And on her, as the surge on the shingle,
     My soul beats and breaks evermore."




CHAPTER TWELVE. Bersi's Bad Luck At The Thor's-Ness Thing.

In the winter, sports were held at Saurbae. Bersi's lad, Asmund, was
there, and likewise the sons of Thord; but they were younger than he,
and nothing like so sturdy. When they wrestled Asmund took no heed
to stint his strength, and the sons of Thord often came home blue and
bleeding. Their mother Thordis was ill pleased, and asked her husband
would he give Bersi a hint to make it up on behalf of his son. Nay,
Thord answered, he was loath to do that.

"Then I'll find my brother Bork," said she, "and it will be just as bad
in the end."

Thord bade her do no such thing. "I would rather talk it over with him,"
said he; and so, at her wish, he met Bersi, and hinted that some amends
were owing.

Said Bersi, "Thou art far too greedy of getting, nowadays. This kind of
thing will end in losing thee thy good name. Thou wilt never want while
anything is to be got here."

Thord went home, and there was a coolness between them while that winter
lasted.

Spring slipped by, until it was time for the meeting at Thor's-ness.
By then, Bersi thought he saw through this claim of Thord's, and found
Thordis at the bottom of it. For all that, he made ready to go to the
Thing. By old use and wont these two neighbours should have gone riding
together; so Bersi set out and came to Muli, but when he got there Thord
was gone.

"Well," said he, "Thord has broken old use and wont in awaiting me no
longer."

"If breach there be," answered Thordis, "it is thy doing. This is
nothing to what we owe thee, and I doubt there will be more to follow."

They had words. Bersi said that harm would come of her evil counsel; and
so they parted.

When he left the house he said to his men, "Let us turn aside to the
shore and take a boat; it is a long way to ride round the waterhead." So
they took a boat--it was one of Thord's--and went their way.

They came to the meeting when most other folks were already there, and
went to the tent of Olaf Peacock of Hjardarholt (Herdholt), for he was
Bersi's chief. It was crowded inside, and Bersi found no seat. He used
to sit next Thord, but that place was filled. In it there sat a big and
strong-looking man, with a bear-skin coat, and a hood that shaded his
face. Bersi stood a while before him, but the seat was not given up. He
asked the man for his name, and was told he might call him Bruin, or
he might call him Hoodie--which-ever he liked; whereupon he said in
verse:--

                    (35)
     "Who sits in the seat of the warriors,
     With the skin of the bear wrapped around him,
     So wild in his look?--Ye have welcomed
     A wolf to your table, good kinsfolk!
     Ah, now may I know him, I reckon!
     Doth he name himself Bruin, or Hoodie?--
     We shall meet once again in the morning,
     And maybe he'll prove to be--Steinar."

"And it's no use for thee to hide thy name, thou in the bearskin," said
he.

"No more it is," he answered. "Steinar I am, and I have brought money
to pay thee for Cormac, if so be it is needed. But first I bid thee to
fight. It will have to be seen whether thou get the two marks of silver,
or whether thou lose them both."

Upon which quoth Bersi:--

                    (36)
     "They that waken the storm of the spear-points--
     For slaughter and strife they are famous--
     To the island they bid me for battle,
     Nor bitter I think it nor woeful;
     For long in that craft am I learned
     To loosen the Valkyrie's tempest
     In the lists, and I fear not to fight them--
     Unflinching in battle am I.

"Well I wot, though," said he, "that ye and your gang mean to make away
with me. But I would let you know that I too have something to say about
it--something that will set down your swagger, maybe."

"It is not thy death we are seeking," answered Steinar; "all we want is
to teach thee thy true place."

Bersi agreed to fight him, and then went out to a tent apart and took up
his abode there.

Now one day the word went round for bathing in the sea. Said Steinar to
Bersi, "Wilt try a race with me, Bersi?"

"I have given over swimming," said he, "and yet I'll try."

Bersi's manner of swimming was to breast the waves and strike out with
all his might. In so doing he showed a charm he wore round his neck.
Steinar swam at him and tore off the lucky-stone with the bag it was in,
and threw them both into the water, saying in verse:--

                    (37)
     "Long I've lived,
     And I've let the gods guide me;
     Brown hose I never wore
     To bring the luck beside me.
     I've never knit
     All to  keep me thriving
     Round my neck a bag of worts,
     --And lo!  I'm living!"

Upon that they struck out to land.

But this turn that Steinar played was Thord's trick to make Bersi lose
his luck in the fight. And Thord went along the shore at low water and
found the luck-stone, and hid it away.

Now Steinar had a sword that was called after Skrymir the giant: it was
never fouled, and no mishap followed it. On the day fixed, Thord and
Steinar went out of the tent, and Cormac also came to the meeting to
hold the shield of Steinar. Olaf Peacock got men to help Bersi at the
fight, for Thord had been used to hold his shield, but this time failed
him. So Bersi went to the trysting-place with a shield-bearer who is not
named in the story, and with the round target that once had belonged to
Thorveig.

Each man was allowed three shields. Bersi cut up two, and then Cormac
took the third. Bersi hacked away, but Whitting his sword stuck fast
in the iron border of Steinar's shield. Cormac whirled it up just when
Steinar was striking out. He struck the shield-edge, and the sword
glanced off, slit Bersi's buttock, sliced his thigh down to the
knee-joint, and stuck in the bone. And so Bersi fell.

"There!" cried Steinar, "Cormac's fine is paid."

But Bersi leapt up, slashed at him, and clove his shield. The
sword-point was at Steinar's breast when Thord rushed forth and dragged
him away, out of reach.

"There!" cried Thord to Bersi, "I have paid thee for the mauling of my
sons."

So Bersi was carried to the tent, and his wound was dressed. After a
while, Thord came in; and when Bersi saw him he said:--

                    (38)
     "When the wolf of the war-god was howling
     Erstwhile in the north, thou didst aid me:
     When it gaped in my hand, and it girded
     At the Valkyries' gate for to enter.
     But now wilt thou never, O warrior,
     At need in the storm-cloud of Odin
     Give me help in the tempest of targes
     --Untrusty, unfaithful art thou.

                    (39)
     "For when I was a stripling I showed me
     To the stems of the lightning of battle
     Right meet for the mist of the war-maids;
     --Ah me!  that was said long ago.
     But now, and I may not deny it
     My neighbours in earth must entomb me,
     At the spot I have sought for grave-mound
     Where Saurbae lies level and green."

Said Thord, "I have no wish for thy death; but I own it is no sorrow to
see thee down for once."

To which Bersi answered in song:--

                    (40)
     "The friend that I trusted has failed me
     In the fight, and my hope is departed:
     I speak what I know of; and note it,
     Ye nobles,--I tell ye no leasing.
     Lo, the raven is ready for carnage,
     But rare are the friends who should succour.
     Yet still let them scorn me and threaten,
     I shrink not, I am not dismayed."

After this, Bersi was taken home to Saurbae, and lay long in his wounds.

But when he was carried into the tent, at that very moment Steinar spoke
thus to Cormac:--

                    (41)
     "Of the reapers in harvest of Hilda
     --Thou hast heard of it--four men and eight men
     With the edges of Skrymir to aid me
     I have urged to their flight from the battle.
     Now the singer, the steward of Odin,
     Hath smitten at last even Bersi
     With the flame of the weapon that feedeth
     The flocks of the carrion crows."

"I would have thee keep Skrymir now for thy own, Cormac," said he,
"because I mean this fight to be my last."

After that, they parted in friendly wise: Steinar went home, and Cormac
fared to Mel.




CHAPTER THIRTEEN. Steingerd Leaves Bersi.

Next it is told of Bersi. His wound healed but slowly. Once on a time a
many folk were met to talk about that meeting and what came of it, and
Bersi made this song:--

                    (42)
     "Thou didst leave me forlorn to the sword-stroke,
     Strong lord of the field of the serpent!
     And needy and fallen ye find me,
     Since my foeman ye shielded from danger.
     Thus cunning and counsel are victors,
     When the craft of the spear-shaft avails not;
     But this, as I think, is the ending,
     O Thord, of our friendship for ever!"

A while later Thord came to his bedside and brought back the luck-stone;
and with it he healed Bersi, and they took to their friendship again and
held it unbroken ever after.

Because of these happenings, Steingerd fell into loathing of Bersi and
made up her mind to part with him; and when she had got everything
ready for going away she went to him and said:--"First ye were called
Eygla's-Bersi, and then Holmgang-Bersi, but now your right name will be
Breech-Bersi!" and spoke her divorce from him.

She went north to her kinsfolk, and meeting with her brother Thorkel she
bade him seek her goods again from Bersi--her pin-money and her dowry,
saying that she would not own him now that he was maimed. Thorkel
Toothgnasher never blamed her for that, and agreed to undertake her
errand; but the winter slipped by and his going was put off.




CHAPTER FOURTEEN. The Bane Of Thorkel Toothgnasher.

Afterwards, in the spring, Thorkel Toothgnasher set out to find Bersi
and to seek Steingerd's goods again. Bersi said that his burden was
heavy enough to bear, even though both together underwent the weight of
it. "And I shall not pay the money!" said he.

Said Thorkel, "I bid thee to the holmgang at Orrestholm beside Tjaldanes
(Tentness)."

"That ye will think hardly worth while," said Bersi, "such a champion as
you are; and yet I undertake for to come."

So they came to the holme and fell to the holmgang. Thord carried the
shield before Bersi, and Vali was Thorkel's shield-bearer. When two
shields had been hacked to splinters, Bersi bade Thorkel take the third;
but he would not. Bersi still had a shield, and a sword that was long
and sharp.

Said Thorkel, "The sword ye have, Bersi, is longer than lawful."

"That shall not be," cried Bersi; and took up his other sword, Whitting,
two-handed, and smote Thorkel his deathblow. Then sang he:--

                    (43)
     "I have smitten Toothgnasher and slain him,
     And I smile at the pride of his boasting.
     One more to my thirty I muster,
     And, men!  say ye this of the battle:--
     In the world not a lustier liveth
     Among lords of the steed of the oar-bench;
     Though by eld of my strength am I stinted
     To stain the black wound-bird with blood."

After these things Vali bade Bersi to the holmgang, but he answered in
this song:--

                    (44)
     "They that waken the war of the mail-coats,
     For warfare and manslaying famous,
     To the lists they have bid me to battle,
     Nor bitter I think it not woeful.
     It is sport for yon swordsmen who goad me
     To strive in the Valkyries' tempest
     On the holme; but I fear not to fight them--
     Unflinching in battle am I!"

The were even about to begin fighting, when Thord came and spoke to them
saying:--"Woeful waste of life I call it, if brave men shall be smitten
down for the sake of any such matters. I am ready to make it up between
ye two."

To this they agreed, and he said:--"Vali, this methinks is the most
likely way of bringing you together. Let Bersi take thy sister Thordis
to wife. It is a match that may well be to thy worship."

Bersi agreed to this, and it was settled that the land of Brekka should
go along with her as a dowry; and so this troth was plighted between
them. Bersi afterwards had a strong stone wall built around his
homestead, and sat there for many winters in peace.




CHAPTER FIFTEEN. The Rescue Of Steinvor Slim-ankles.

There was a man named Thorarin Alfsson, who lived in the north at
Thambardal; that is a dale which goes up from the fiord called Bitra.
He was a big man and mighty, and he was by-named Thorarin the Strong. He
had spent much of his time in seafaring (as a chapman) and so lucky was
he that he always made the harbour he aimed at.

He had three sons; one was named Alf, the next Loft, and the third
Skofti. Thorarin was a most overbearing man, and his sons took after
him. They were rough, noisy fellows.

Not far away, at Tunga (Tongue) in Bitra, lived a man called Odd. His
daughter was named Steinvor, a pretty girl and well set up; her by-name
was Slim-ankles. Living with Odd were many fisherman; among them,
staying there for the fishing-season, was one Glum, an ill-tempered
carle and bad to deal with.

Now once upon a time these two, Odd and Glum, were in talk together
which were the greatest men in the countryside. Glum reckoned Thorarin
to be foremost, but Odd said Holmgang Bersi was better than he in every
way.

"How can ye make that out?" asked Glum.

"Is there any likeness whatever," said Odd, "between the bravery of
Bersi and the knavery of Thorarin?"

So they talked about this until they fell out, and laid a wager upon it.

Then Glum wend and told Thorarin. He grew very angry and made many a
threat against Odd. And in a while he went and carried off Steinvor
from Tunga, all to spite her father; and he gave out that if Odd
said anything against it, the worse for him: and so took her home to
Thambardal.

Things went on so for a while, and then Odd went to see Holmgang Bersi,
and told him what had happened. He asked him for help to get Steinvor
back and to wreak vengeance for that shame. Bersi answered that such
words had been better unsaid, and bade him go home and take no share in
the business. "But yet," added he, "I promise that I will see to it."

No sooner was Odd gone than Bersi made ready to go from home. He rode
fully armed, with Whitting at his belt, and three spears; he came to
Thambardal when the day was far spent and the women were coming out
of the bower. Steinvor saw him and turning to meet him told of her
unhappiness.

"Make ready to go with me," said he; and that she did.

He would not go to Thambardal for nothing, he said; and so he turned to
the door where men were sitting by long fires. He knocked at the door,
and out there came a man--his name was Thorleif. But Thorarin knew
Bersi's voice, and rushed forth with a great carving-knife and laid on
to him. Bersi was aware of it, and drew Whitting, and struck him his
death-blow.

Then he leapt on horseback and set Steinvor on his knee and took his
spears which she had kept for him. He rode some way into the wood, where
in a hidden spot he left his horse and Steinvor, bidding her await him.
Then he went to a narrow gap through which the high-road ran, and there
made ready to stand against his foes.

In Thambardal there was anything but peace. Thorleif ran to tell the
sons of Thorarin that he lay dead in the doorway. They asked who had
done the deed. He told them. Then they went after Bersi and steered the
shortest way to the gap, meaning to get there first; but by that time he
was already first at the gap.

When they came near him, Bersi hurled a spear at Alf, and it went right
through him. Then Loft cast at Bersi, but he caught the spear on his
target and it dropped off. Then Bersi threw at Loft and killed him, and
so he did by Skofti.

When all was over, the house-carles of the brothers came up. Thorleif
turned back to meet them, and they all went home together.

After that Bersi went to find Steinvor, and mounted his horse. He came
home before men were out of bed. They asked him about his journey and
he told them. When Odd met him he asked about the fight and how it had
passed, and Bersi answered in this verse:--

                    (45)
     "There was one fed the wolves has encountered
     His weird in the dale of the Bowstring--
     Thorarin the Strong, 'neath the slayer
     Lay slain by the might of my weapon.
     And loss of their lives men abided
     When Loft fell, and Alf fell, and Skofti.
     They were four, yonder kinsmen, and fated--
     They were fey--and I met them, alone!"

After that Odd went home, but Steinvor was with Bersi, though it
misliked Thordis, his wife. By this time his stone wall was some-what
broken down, but he had it built up again; and it is said that no
blood-money was ever paid for Thorarin and his sons. So the time went
on.




CHAPTER SIXTEEN. How Vali Fell Before An Old Man And A Boy.

Once on a day when Thordis and Bersi were talking together, said he,
"I have been thinking I might ask Olaf Peacock for a child of his to
foster."

"Nay," said she, "I think little of that. It seems to me a great
trouble, and I doubt if folk will reckon more of us for it."

"It means that I should have a sure friend," answered he. "I have many
foes, and I am growing heavy with age."

So he went to see Olaf, and asked for a child to foster. Olaf took it
with thanks, and Bersi carried Halldor home with him and got Steinvor to
be nurse. This too misliked Thordis, and she laid hands on every penny
she could get (for fear it should go to Steinvor and the foster-child).

At last Bersi took to ageing much. There was one time when men riding to
the Thing stayed at his house. He sat all by himself, and his food was
brought him before the rest were served. He had porridge while other
folk had cheese and curds. Then he made this verse:--

                    (46)
     "To batten the black-feathered wound-bird
     With the blade of my axe have I stricken
     Full thirty and five of my foemen;
     I am famed for the slaughter of warriors.
     May the fiends have my soul if I stain not
     My sharp-edged falchion once over!
     And then let the breaker of broadswords
     Be borne--and with speed--to the grave!"

"What?" said Halldor; "hast thou a mind to kill another man, then?"

Answered Bersi, "I see the man it would rightly serve!"

Now Thordis let her brother Vali feed his herds on the land of Brekka.
Bersi bade his house-carles work at home, and have no dealings with
Vali; but still Halldor thought it a hardship that Bersi had not his own
will with his own wealth. One day Bersi made this verse:--

                    (47)
     "Here we lie,
          Both on one settle--
     Halldor and I,
          Men of no mettle.
     Youth ails thee,
          But thou'lt win through it;
     Age ails me,
          And I must rue it!"

"I do hate Vali," said Halldor; and Bersi answered thus in verse:--

                    (48)
     "Yon Vali, so wight as he would be,
     Well wot I our pasture he grazes;
     Right fain yonder fierce helmet-wearer
     Under foot my dead body would trample!
     But often my wrongs have I wreaked
     In wrath on the mail-coated warrior--
     On the stems of the sun of the ocean
     I have stained the wound-serpent for less!"

And again he said:--

                    (49)
     "With eld I am listless and lamed--
     I, the lord of the gold of the armlet:
     I sit, and am still under many
     A slight from the warders of spear-meads.
     Though shield-bearers shape for the singer
     To shiver alone in the grave-mound,
     Yet once in the war would I redden
     The wand that hews helms ere I fail."

"Thy heart is not growing old, foster-father mine!" cried Halldor.

Upon that Bersi fell into talk with Steinvor, and said to her "I am
laying a plot, and I need thee to help me."

She said she would if she could.

"Pick a quarrel," said he, "with Thordis about the milk-kettle, and do
thou hold on to it until you whelm it over between you. Then I will come
in and take her part and give thee nought but bad words. Then go to Vali
and tell him how ill we treat thee."

Everything turned out as he had planned. She went to Vali and told him
that things were no way smooth for her; would he take her over the gap
(to Bitra to her father's:) and so he did.

But when he was on the way back again, out came Bersi and Halldor to
meet him. Bersi had a halberd in one hand and a staff in the other, and
Halldor had Whitting. As soon as Vali saw them he turned and hewed
at Bersi. Halldor came at his back and fleshed Whitting in his
hough-sinews. Thereupon he turned sharply and fell upon Halldor.
Then Bersi set the halberd-point betwixt his shoulders. That was his
death-wound.

Then they set his shield at his feet and his sword at his head, and
spread his cloak over him; and after that got on horseback and rode to
five homesteads to make known the deed they had done and then rode home.
Men went and buried Vali, and the place where he fell has ever since
been called Vali's fall.

Halldor was twelve winters old when these doings came to pass.




CHAPTER SEVENTEEN. How Steingerd Was Married Again.

Now there was a man named Thorvald, the son of Eystein, bynamed
the Tinker: he was a wealthy man, a smith, and a skald; but he was
mean-spirited for all that. His brother Thorvard lived in the north
country at Fliot (Fleet); and they had many kinsmen,-- the Skidings they
were called,--but little luck or liking.

Now Thorvald the Tinker asked Steingerd to wife. Her folk were for it,
and she said nothing against it; and so she was wed to him in the very
same summer in which she left Bersi.

When Cormac heard the news he made as though he knew nothing whatever
about the matter; for a little earlier he had taken his goods aboard
ship, meaning to go away with his brother. But one morning early he rode
from the ship and went to see Steingerd; and when he got talk with her,
he asked would she make him a shirt. To which she answered that he had
no business to pay her visits; neither Thorvald nor his kinsmen would
abide it, she said, but have their revenge.

Thereupon he made his voice:--

                    (50)
     "Nay, think it or thole it I cannot,
     That thou, a young fir of the forest
     Enwreathed in the gold that thou guardest,
     Shouldst be given to a tinkering tinsmith.
     Nay, scarce can I smile, O thou glittering
     In silk like the goddess of Baldur,
     Since thy father handfasted and pledged thee,
     So famed as thou art, to a coward."

"In such words," answered Steingerd, "an ill will is plain to hear. I
shall tell Thorvald of this ribaldry: no man would sit still under such
insults."

Then sang Cormac:--

                    (51)
     "What gain is to get if he threatens,
     White goddess in raiment of beauty,
     The scorn that the Skidings may bear me?
     I'll set them a weft for their weaving!
     I'll rhyme you the roystering caitiffs
     Till rocks go afloat on the water;
     And lucky for them if they loosen
     The line of their fate that I ravel!"

Thereupon they parted with no blitheness, and Cormac went to his ship.




CHAPTER EIGHTEEN. Cormac's Voyage To Norway.

The two brothers had but left the roadstead, when close beside their
ship, uprose a walrus. Cormac hurled at it a pole-staff, which struck
the beast, so that it sank again: but the men aboard thought that they
knew its eyes for the eyes of Thorveig the witch. That walrus came up
no more, but of Thorveig it was heard that she lay sick to death; and
indeed folk say that this was the end of her.

Then they sailed out to sea, and at last came to Norway, where at that
time Hakon, the foster-son of Athelstan, was king. He made them welcome,
and so they stayed there the winter long with all honour.

Next summer they set out to the wars, and did many great deeds. Along
with them went a man called Siegfried, a German of good birth; and they
made raids both far and wide. One day as they were gone up the country
eleven men together came against the two brothers, and set upon them;
but this business ended in their overcoming the whole eleven, and so
after a while back to their ship. The vikings had given them up for
lost, and fain were their folk when they came back with victory and
wealth.

In this voyage the brothers got great renown: and late in the summer,
when winter was coming on, they made up their minds to steer for Norway.
They met with cold winds; the sail was behung with icicles, but the
brothers were always to the fore. It was on his voyage that Cormac made
the song:--

                    (52)
     "O shake me yon rime from the awning;
     Your singer's a-cold in his berth;
     For the hills are all hooded, dear Skardi,
     In the hoary white veil of the firth.
     There's one they call Wielder of Thunder
     I would were as chill and as cold;
     But he leaves not the side of his lady
     As the lindworm forsakes not its gold."

"Always talking of her now!" said Thorgils; "and yet thou wouldst not
have her when thou couldst."

"That was more the fault of witchcraft," answered Cormac, "that any want
of faith in me."

Not long after they were sailing hard among crags, and shortened sail in
great danger.

"It is a pity Thorvald Tinker is not with us here!" said Cormac.

Said Thorgils with a smile, "Most likely he is better off than we,
to-day!"

But before long they came to land in Norway.




CHAPTER NINETEEN. How Cormac Fought In Ireland, And Went Home To
Iceland; And How He Met Steingerd Again.

While they were abroad there had been a change of kings; Hakon was dead,
and Harald Greyfell reigned in his stead. They offered friendship to the
king, and he took their suit kindly; so they went with him to Ireland,
and fought battles there.

Once upon a time when they had gone ashore with the king, a great host
came against him, and as the armies met, Cormac made this song:--

                    (53)
     "I dread not a death from the foemen,
     Though we dash at them, buckler to buckler,
     While our prince in the power of his warriors
     Is proud of me foremost in battle.
     But the glimpse of a glory comes o'er me
     Like the gleam of the moon on the skerry,
     And I faint and I fail for my longing,
     For the fair one at home in the North."

"Ye never get into danger," said Thorgils, "but ye think of Steingerd!"

"Nay," answered Cormac, "but it's not often I forget her."

Well: this was a great battle, and king Harald won a glorious victory.
While his men drove the rout before him, the brothers were shoulder to
shoulder; and they fell upon nine men at once and fought them. And while
they were at it, Cormac sang:--

                    (54)
     "Fight on, arrow-driver, undaunted,
     And down with the foemen of Harald!
     What are nine?  they are nought!  Thou and I, lad,
     Are enough;--they are ours!--we have won them!
     But--at home,--in the arms of an outlaw
     That all the gods loathe for a monster,
     So white and so winsome she nestles
     --Yet once she was loving to me!"

"It always comes down to that!" said Thorgils. When the fight was over,
the brothers had got the victory, and the nine men had fallen before
them; for which they won great praise from the king, and many honours
beside.

But while they were ever with the king in his warfarings, Thorgils was
aware that Cormac was used to sleep but little; and he asked why this
might be. This was the song Cormac made in answer:--

                    (55)
     "Surf on a rock-bound shore of the sea-king's blue domain--
     Look how it lashes the crags, hark how it thunders again!
     But all the din of the isles that the Delver heaves in foam
     In the draught of the undertow glides out to the sea-gods'
                                   home.
     Now, which of us two should test?  Is it thou, with thy
                                   heart at ease,
     Or I that am surf on the shore in the tumult of angry seas?
     --Drawn, if I sleep, to her that shines with the ocean-
                                   gleam,
     --Dashed, when I wake, to woe, for the want of my
                                   glittering dream."

"And now let me tell you this, brother," he went on. "Hereby I give out
that I am going back to Iceland."

Said Thorgils, "There is many a snare set for thy feet, brother, to drag
thee down, I know not whither."

But when the king heard of his longing to begone, he sent for Cormac,
and said that he did unwisely, and would hinder him from his journey.
But all this availed nothing, and aboard ship he went.

At the outset they met with foul winds, so that they shipped great seas,
and the yard broke. Then Cormac sang:--

                    (56)
     "I take it not ill, like the Tinker
     If a trickster had foundered his muck-sled;
     For he loves not rough travelling, the losel,
     And loath would he be of this uproar.
     I flinch not,--nay, hear it, ye fearless
     Who flee not when arrows are raining,--
     Though the steeds of the ocean be storm-bound
     And stayed in the harbour of Solund."

So they pushed out to sea, and hard weather they tholed. Once on a time
when the waves broke over the deck and drenched them all, Cormac made
this song:--

                    (57)
     "O the Tinker's a lout and a lubber,
     And the life of a sailor he dares not,
     When the snow-crested surges caress us
     And sweep us away with their kisses,
     He bides in a berth that is warmer,
     Embraced in the arms of his lady;
     And lightly she lulls him to slumber,
     --But long she has reft me of rest!"

They had a very rough voyage, but landed at last in Midfiord, and
anchored off shore. Looking landward they beheld where a lady was riding
by; and Cormac knew at once that it was Steingerd. He bade his men
launch a boat, and rowed ashore. He went quickly from the boat, and got
a horse, and rode to meet her. When they met, he leapt from horseback
and helped her to alight, making a seat for her beside him on the
ground.

Their horses wandered away: the day passed on, and it began to grow
dark. At last Steingerd said, "It is time to look for our horses."

Little search would be needed, said Cormac; but when he looked about,
they were nowhere in sight. As it happened, they were hidden in a gill
not far from where the two were sitting.

So, as night was hard at hand, they set out to walk, and came to a
little farm, where they were taken in and treated well, even as they
needed. That night they slept each on either side of the carven wainscot
that parted bed from bed: and Cormac made this song:--

                    (58)
     "We rest, O my beauty, my brightest,
     But a barrier lies ever between us.
     So fierce are the fates and so mighty
     --I feel it--that rule to their rede.
     Ah, nearer I would be, and nigher,
     Till nought should be left to dispart us,
     --The wielder of Skofnung the wonder,
     And the wearer of sheen from the deep."

"It was better thus," said Steingerd: but he sang:--

                    (59)
     "We have slept 'neath one roof-tree--slept softly,
     O sweet one, O queen of the mead-horn,
     O glory of sea-dazzle gleaming,
     These grim hours,--these five nights, I count them.
     And here in the kettle-prow cabined
     While the crow's day drags on in the darkness,
     How loathly me seems to be lying,
     How lonely,--so near and so far!"

"That," said she, "is all over and done with; name it no more." But he
sang:--

                    (60)
     "The hot stone shall float,--ay, the hearth-stone
     Like a husk of the corn on the water,
     --Ah, woe for the wight that she loves not!--
     And the world,--ah, she loathes me!--shall perish,
     And the fells that are famed for their hugeness
     Shall fail and be drowned in the ocean,
     Or ever so gracious a goddess
     Shall grow into beauty like Steingerd."

Then Steingerd cried out that she would not have him make songs upon
her: but he went on:--

                    (61)
     "I have known it and noted it clearly,
     O neckleted fair one, in visions,
     --Is it doom for my hopes,--is it daring
     To dream?--O so oft have I seen it!--
     Even this,--that the boughs of thy beauty,
     O braceleted fair one, shall twine them
     Round the hill where the hawk loves to settle,
     The hand of thy lover, at last."

"That," said she, "never shall be, if I can help it. Thou didst let me
go, once for all; and there is no more hope for thee."

So then they slept the night long; and in the morning, when Cormac was
making ready to be gone, he found Steingerd, and took the ring off his
finger to give her.

"Fiend take thee and thy gold together!" she cried. And this is what he
answered:--

                    (62)
     "To a dame in her broideries dainty
     This drift of the furnace I tendered;
     O day of ill luck, for a lover
     So lured, and so heartlessly cheated!
     Too blithe in the pride of her beauty--
     The bliss that I crave she denies me;
     So rich that no boon can I render,
     --And my ring she would hurl to the fiends!"

So Cormac rode forth, being somewhat angry with Steingerd, but still
more so with the Tinker. He rode home to Mel, and stayed there all the
winter, taking lodgings for his chapmen near the ship.




CHAPTER TWENTY. Of A Spiteful Song That Cormac Never Made; And How Angry
Steingerd Was.

Now Thorvald the Tinker lived in the north-country at Svinadal
(Swindale), but his brother Thorvard at Fliot. In the winter Cormac took
his way northward to see Steingerd; and coming to Svinadal he dismounted
and went into the chamber. She was sitting on the dais, and he took his
seat beside her; Thorvald sat on the bench, and Narfi by him.

Then said Narfi to Thorvald, "How canst thou sit down, with Cormac here?
It is no time, this, for sitting still!"

But Thorvald answered, "I am content; there is no harm done it seems to
me, though they do talk together."

"That is ill," said Narfi.

Not long afterwards Thorvald met his brother Thorvard and told him about
Cormac's coming to his house.

"Is it right, think you," said Thorvard, "to sit still while such things
happen?"

He answered that there was no harm done as yet, but that Cormac's coming
pleased him not.

"I'll mend that," cried Thorvard, "if you dare not. The shame of it
touches us all."

So this was the next thing,--that Thorvard came to Svinadal, and the
Skiding brothers and Narfi paid a gangrel beggar-man to sing a song in
the hearing of Steingerd, and to say that Cormac had made it,--which was
a lie. They said that Cormac had taught this song to one called Eylaug,
a kinswoman of his; and these were the words:--

                    (63)
     "I wish an old witch that I know of,
     So wealthy and proud of her havings,
     Were turned to a steed in the stable
     --Called Steingerd--and I were the rider!
     I'd bit her, and bridle, and saddle,
     I'd back her and drive her and tame her;
     So many she owns for her masters,
     But mine she will never become!"

Then Steingerd grew exceedingly angry, so that she would not so much as
hear Cormac named. When he heard that, he went to see her. Long time
he tried in vain to get speech with her; but at last she gave this
answer,--that she misliked his holding her up to shame,--"And now it is
all over the country-side!"

Cormac said it was not true; but she answered, "Thou mightest flatly
deny it, if I had not heard it."

"Who sang it in thy hearing?" asked he.

She told him who sang it,--"And thou needest not hope for speech with me
if this prove true."

He rode away to look for the rascal, and when he found him the truth
was forced out at last. Cormac was very angry, and set on Narfi and slew
him. That same onset was meant for Thorvald, but he hid himself in the
shadow and skulked, until men came between then and parted them. Said
Cormac:--

                    (64)
     "There, hide in the house like a coward,
     And hope not hereafter to scare me
     With the scorn of thy brethren the Skidings,--
     I'll set them a weft for their weaving!
     I'll rhyme on the swaggering rascals
     Till rocks go afloat on the water;
     And lucky for you if ye loosen
     The line of your fate that I ravel!"

This went all over the country-side and the feud grew fiercer between
them. The brothers Thorvald and Thorvard used big words, and Cormac was
wroth when he heard them.




CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE. How Thorvard Would Not Fight, But Tried To Get The
Law Of Cormac.

After this Thorvard sent word from Fliot that he was fain to fight
Cormac, and he fixed time and place, saying that he would now take
revenge for that song of shame and all other slights.

To this Cormac agreed; and when the day came he went to the spot that
was named, but Thorvard was not there, nor any of his men. Cormac met a
woman from the farm hard by, who greeted him, and they asked each other
for news.

"What is your errand?" said she; "and why are you waiting here?"

Then he answered with this song:--

                    (65)
     "Too slow for the struggle I find him,
     That spender of fire from the ocean,
     Who flung me a challenge to fight him
     From Fleet in the land of the North.
     That half-witted hero should get him
     A heart made of clay for his carcase,
     Though the mate of the may with the necklace
     Is more of a fool than his fere!"

"Now," said Cormac, "I bid Thorvard anew to the holmgang, if he can
be called in his right mind. Let him be every man's nithing if he come
not!" and then he made this song:--

                    (66)
     "The nithing shall silence me never,
     Though now for their shame they attack me,
     But the wit of the Skald is my weapon,
     And the wine of the gods will uphold me.
     And this they shall feel in its fulness;
     Here my fame has its birth and beginning;
     And the stout spears of battle shall see it,
     If I 'scape from their hands with my life."

Then the brothers set on foot a law-suit against him for libel. Cormac's
kinsmen backed him up to answer it, and he would let no terms be made,
saying that they deserved the shame put upon them, and no honour; he was
not unready to meet them, unless they played him false. Thorvard had
not come to the holmgang when he had been challenged, and therefore the
shame had fallen of itself upon him and his, and they must put up with
it.

So time passed until the Huna-water Thing. Thorvard and Cormac both went
to the meeting, and once they came together.

"Much enmity we owe thee," said Thorvard, "and in many ways. Now
therefore I challenge thee to the holmgang, here at the Thing."

Said Cormac, "Wilt thou be fitter than before? Thou hast drawn back time
after time."

"Nevertheless," said Thorvard, "I will risk it. We can abide thy spite
no longer."

"Well," said Cormac, "I'll not stand in the way;" and went home to Mel.




CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO. What The Witch Did For Them In Their Fights.

At Spakonufell (Spae-wife's-fell) lived Thordis the spae-wife, of whom
we have told before, with her husband Thorolf. They were both at the
Thing, and many a man thought her good-will was of much avail. So
Thorvard sought her out, to ask her help against Cormac, and gave her a
fee; and she made him ready for the holmgang according to her craft.

Now Cormac told his mother what was forward, and she asked if he thought
good would come of it.

"Why not?" said he.

"That will not be enough for thee," said Dalla. "Thorvard will never
make bold to fight without witchcraft to help him. I think it wise for
thee to see Thordis the spae-wife, for there is going to be foul play in
this affair."

"It is little to my mind," said he; and yet went to see Thordis, and
asked her help.

"Too late ye have come," said she. "No weapon will bite on him now. And
yet I would not refuse thee. Bide here to-night, and seek thy good luck.
Anyway, I can manage so that iron bite thee no more than him."

So Cormac stayed there for the night; and, awaking, found that some one
was groping round the coverlet at his head. "Who is there?" he asked,
but whoever it was made off, and out at the house-door, and Cormac
after. And then he saw it was Thordis, and she was going to the place
where the fight was to be, carrying a goose under her arm.

He asked what it all meant, and she set down the goose, saying, "Why
couldn't ye keep quiet?"

So he lay down again, but held himself awake, for he wanted to know what
she would be doing. Three times she came, and every time he tried to
find out what she was after. The third time, just as he came out, she
had killed two geese and let the blood run into a bowl, and she had
taken up the third goose to kill it.

"What means this business, foster-mother?" said he.

"True it will prove, Cormac, that you are a hard one to help," said she.
"I was going to break the spell Thorveig laid on thee and Steingerd. Ye
could have loved one another been happy if I had killed the third goose
and no one seen it."

"I believe nought of such things," cried he; and this song he made about
it:--

                    (67)
     "I gave her an ore at the ayre,
     That the arts of my foe should not prosper;
     And twice she has taken the knife,
     And twice she has offered the offering;
     But the blood is the blood of a goose--
     What boots it if two should be slaughtered?--
     Never sacrifice geese for a Skald
     Who sings for the glory of Odin!"

So they went to the holmgang: but Thorvald gave the spae-wife a still
greater fee, and offered the sacrifice of geese; and Cormac said:--

                    (68)
     "Trust never another man's mistress!
     For I know, on this woman who weareth
     The fire of the field of the sea-king
     The fiends have been riding to revel.
     The witch with her hoarse cry is working
     For woe when we go to the holmgang,
     And if bale be the end of the battle
     The blame, be assured, will be hers."

"Well," she said, "I can manage so that none shall know thee." Then
Cormac began to upbraid her, saying she did nought but ill, and wanting
to drag her out to the door to look at her eyes in the sunshine. His
brother Thorgils made him leave that:--"What good will it do thee?" said
he.

Now Steingerd gave out that she had a mind to see the fight; and so she
did. When Cormac saw her he made this song:--

                    (69)
     "I have fared to the field of the battle,
     O fair one that wearest the wimple!
     And twice for thy sake have I striven;
     What stays me as now from thy favour?
     This twice have I gotten thee glory,
     O goddess of ocean!  and surely
     To my dainty delight, to my darling
     I am dearer by far than her mate."

So then they set to. Cormac's sword bit not at all, and for a long while
they smote strokes one upon the other, but neither sword bit. At last
Cormac smote upon Thorvard's side so great a blow that his ribs gave
way and were broken; he could fight no more, and thereupon they parted.
Cormac looked and saw where a bull was standing, which he slew for a
sacrifice; and being heated, he doffed his helmet from his head, saying
this song:--

                    (70)
     "I have fared to the field of the battle,
     O fair one that wearest the bracelet!
     Even three times for thee have I striven,
     And this thou canst never deny me.
     But the reed of the fight would not redden,
     Though it rang on the shield-bearer's harness;
     For the spells of a spae-wife had blunted
     My sword that was eager for blood."

He wiped the sweat from him on the corner of Steingerd's mantle; and
said:--

                    (71)
     "So oft, being wounded and weary,
     I must wipe my sad brow on thy mantle.
     What pangs for thy sake are my portion,
     O pine-tree with red gold enwreathed!
     Yet beside thee he snugs on the settle
     As thou seamest thy broidery,--that rhymester!
     And the shame of it whelms me in sorrow,
     O Steingerd!--that rascal unslain!"

And then Cormac prayed Steingerd that she would go with him: but Nay,
she said; she would have her own way about men. So they parted, and both
were ill pleased.

Thorvard was taken home, and she bound his wounds. Cormac was now always
meeting with Steingerd. Thorvard healed but slowly; and when he could
get on his feet he went to see Thordis, and asked her what was best to
help his healing.

"A hill there is," answered she, "not far away from here, where elves
have their haunt. Now get you the bull that Cormac killed, and redden
the outer side of the hill with its blood, and make a feast for the
elves with its flesh. Then thou wilt be healed."

So they sent word to Cormac that they would buy the bull. He answered
that he would sell it, but then he must have the ring that was
Steingerd's. So they brought the ring, took the bull, and did with it as
Thordis bade them do. On which Cormac made a song:--

                    (72)
     "When the workers of wounds are returning,
     And with them the sacrifice reddened,
     Then a lady in raiment of linen,
     Who loved me, time was,--she will ask:--
     My ring,--have ye robbed me?--where is it?
     --I have wrought them no little displeasure:
     For the swain that is swarthy has won it,
     The son of old Ogmund, the skald."

It fell out as he guessed. Steingerd was very angry because they had
sold her ring.




CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE. How Cormac Beat Thorvard Again.

After that, Thorvard was soon healed, and when he thought he was strong
again, he rode to Mel and challenged Cormac to the holmgang.

"It takes thee long to tire of it," said Cormac: "but I'll not say thee
nay."

So they went to the fight, and Thordis met Thorvard now as before, but
Cormac sought no help from her. She blunted Cormac's sword, so that
it would not bite, but yet he struck so great a stroke on Thorvard's
shoulder that the collarbone was broken and his hand was good for
nothing. Being so maimed he could fight no longer, and had to pay
another ring for his ransom.

Then Thorolf of Spakonufell set upon Cormac and struck at him. He warded
off the blow and sang this song:--

                    (73)
     "This reddener of shields, feebly wrathful,
     His rusty old sword waved against me,
     Who am singer and sacred to Odin!
     Go, snuffle, most wretched of men, thou!
     A thrust of thy sword is as thewless
     As thou, silly stirrer of battle.
     What danger to me from thy daring,
     Thou doited old witch-woman's carle?"

Then he killed a bull in sacrifice according to use and wont, saying,
"Ill we brook your overbearing and the witchcraft of Thordis:" and he
made this song:--

                    (74)
     "The witch in the wave of the offering
     Has wasted the flame of the buckler,
     Lest its bite on his back should be deadly
     At the bringing together of weapons.
     My sword was not sharp for the onset
     When I sought the helm-wearer in battle;
     But the cur got enough to cry craven,
     With a clout that will mind him of me!"

After that each party went home, and neither was well pleased with these
doings.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR. How They All Went Out To Norway.

Now all the winter long Cormac and Thorgils laid up their ship in
Hrutafiord; but in spring the chapmen were off to sea, and so the
brothers made up their minds for the voyage. When they were ready to
start, Cormac went to see Steingerd: and before they two parted he
kissed her twice, and his kisses were not at all hasty. The Tinker would
not have it; and so friends on both sides came in, and it was settled
that Cormac should pay for this that he had done.

"How much?" asked he.

"The two rings that I parted with," said Thorvard. Then Cormac made a
song:--

                    (75)
     "Here is gold of the other's well gleaming
     In guerdon for this one and that one,--
     Here is treasure of Fafnir the fire-drake
     In fee for the kiss of my lady.
     Never wearer of ring, never wielder
     Of weapon has made such atonement;
     Never dearer were deeply-drawn kisses,--
     For the dream of my bliss is betrayed."

And then, when he started to go aboard his ship he made another song:--

                    (76)
     "One song from my heart would I send her
     Ere we shall, ere I leave her and lose her,
     That dainty one, decked in her jewels
     Who dwells in the valley of Swindale.
     And each word that I utter shall enter
     The ears of that lady of bounty,
     Saying--Bright one, my beauty, I love thee,
     Ah, better by far than my life!"

So Cormac went abroad and his brother Thorgils went with him; and when
they came to the king's court they were made welcome.

Now it is told that Steingerd spoke to Thorvald the Tinker that they
also should abroad together. He answered that it was mere folly, but
nevertheless he could not deny her. So they set off on their voyage: and
as they made their way across the sea, they were attacked by vikings who
fell on them to rob them and to carry away Steingerd. But it so happened
that Cormac heard of it; and he made after them and gave good help, so
that they saved everything that belonged to them, and came safely at
last to the court of the king of Norway.

One day Cormac was walking in the street, and spied Steingerd sitting
within doors. So he went into the house and sat down beside her, and
they had a talk together which ended in his kissing her four kisses. But
Thorvald was on the watch. He drew his sword, but the women-folk rushed
in to part them, and word was sent to King Harald. He said they were
very troublesome people to keep in order.--"But let me settle this
matter between you," said he; and they agreed.

Then spake the king:--"One kiss shall be atoned for by this, that Cormac
helped you to get safely to land. The next kiss is Cormac's, because he
saved Steingerd. For the other two he shall pay two ounces of gold."

Upon which Cormac sang the same song that he had made before:--

                    (77)
     "Here is gold of the otter's well gleaming
     In guerdon for this one and that one,--
     Here is treasure of Fafnir the fire-drake
     In fee for the kiss of my lady.
     Never wearer of ring, never wielder
     Of weapon has made such atonement;
     Never dearer were deeply-drawn kisses--
     And the dream of my bliss is betrayed."

Another day he was walking in the street and met Steingerd again. He
turned to her and prayed her to walk with him. She would not; whereupon
he laid hand on her, to lead her along. She cried out for help; and as
it happened, the king was standing not far off, and went up to them.
He thought this behaviour most unseemly, and took her away, speaking
sharply to Cormac. King Harald made himself very angry over this affair;
but Cormac was one of his courtiers, and it was not long before he got
into favour again, and then things went fair and softly for the rest of
the winter.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE. How They Cruised With The King's Fleet, And
Quarrelled, And Made It Up.

In the following spring King Harald set forth to the land of Permia with
a great host. Cormac was one of the captains in that warfaring, and in
another ship was Thorvald: the other captains of ships are not named in
our story.

Now as they were all sailing in close order through a narrow sound,
Cormac swung his steering-oar and hit Thorvald a clout on the ear, so
that he fell from his place at the helm in a swoon; and Cormac's ship
hove to, when she lost her rudder. Steingerd had been sitting beside
Thorvald; she laid hold of the tiller, and ran Cormac down. When he saw
what she was doing, he sang:--

                    (78)
     "There is one that is nearer and nigher
     To the noblest of dames than her lover:
     With the haft of the helm is he smitten
     On the hat-block--and fairly amidships!
     The false heir of Eystein--he falters--
     He falls in the poop of his galley!
     Nay!  steer not upon me, O Steingerd,
     Though stoutly ye carry the day!"

So Cormac's ship capsized under him; but his crew were saved without
loss of time, for there were plenty of people round about. Thorvald soon
came round again, and they all went on their way. The king offered
to settle the matter between them; and when they both agreed, he gave
judgment that Thorvald's hurt was atoned for by Cormac's upset.

In the evening they went ashore; and the king and his men sat down to
supper. Cormac was sitting outside the door of a tent, drinking out of
the same cup with Steingerd. While they were busy at it, a young fellow
for mere sport and mockery stole the brooch out of Cormac's fur cloak,
which he had doffed and laid aside; and when he came to take his cloak
again, the brooch was gone. He sprang up and rushed after the young
fellow, with the spear that he called Vigr (the spear) and shot at him,
but missed. This was the song he made about it:--

                    (79)
     "The youngster has pilfered my pin,
     As I pledged the gay dame in the beaker;
     And now must we brawl for a brooch
     Like boys when they wrangle and tussle.
     Right well have I shafted my spear,
     Though I shot nothing more than the gravel:
     But sure, if I missed at my man,
     The moss has been prettily slaughtered!"

After this they went on their way to the land of Permia, and after that
they went home again to Norway.




CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX. How Cormac Saved Steingerd Once More From Pirates;
And How They Parted For Good And All.

Thorvald the Tinker fitted out his ship for a cruise to Denmark, and
Steingerd sailed with him. A little afterwards the brothers set out on
the same voyage, and late one evening they made the Brenneyjar.

There they saw Thorvald's ship riding, and found him aboard with part of
his crew; but they had been robbed of all their goods, and Steingerd
had been carried off by Vikings. Now the leader of those Vikings was
Thorstein, the son of that Asmund Ashenside, the old enemy of Ogmund,
the father of Cormac and Thorgils.

So Thorvald and Cormac met, and Cormac asked how came it that his voyage
had been so unlucky.

"Things have not turned out for the best, indeed," said he.

"What is the matter?" asked Cormac. "Is Steingerd missing?"

"She is gone," said Thorvald, "and all our goods."

"Why don't you go after her?" asked Cormac.

"We are not strong enough," said Thorvald.

"Do you mean to say you can't?" said Cormac.

"We have not the means to fight Thorstein," said Thorvald. "But if thou
hast, go in and fight for thy own hand."

"I will," said Cormac.

So at nightfall the brothers went in a boat and rowed to the Viking
fleet, and boarded Thorstein's ship. Steingerd was in the cabin on the
poop; she had been allotted to one of the Vikings; but most of the crew
were ashore round the cooking-fires. Cormac got the story out of the men
who were cooking, and they told all the brothers wanted to know. They
clambered on board by the ladder; Thorgils dragged the bridegroom out to
the gunwale, and Cormac cut him down then and there. Then he dived into
the sea with Steingerd and swam ashore; but when he was nearing the land
a swarm of eels twisted round his hands and feet, so that he was dragged
under. On which he made this song:--

                    (80)
     "They came at me yonder in crowds,
     O kemp of the shield-serpents' wrangle!
     When I fared on my way through the flood,
     That flock of the wights of the water.
     And ne'er to the gate of the gods
     Had I got me, if there had I perished;
     Yet once and again have I won,
     Little woman, thy safety in peril!"

So he swam ashore and brought Steingerd back to her husband.

Thorvald bade Steingerd to go, at last, along with Cormac, for he had
fairly won her, and manfully. That was what he, too, desired, said
Cormac; but "Nay," said Steingerd, "she would not change knives."

"Well," said Cormac, "it was plain that this was not to be. Evil
beings," he said, "ill luck, had parted them long ago." And he made this
song:--

                    (81)
     "Nay, count not the comfort had brought me,
     Fair queen of the ring, thy embrace!
     Go, mate with the man of thy choosing,
     Scant mirth will he get of thy grace!
     Be dearer henceforth to thy dastard,
     False dame of the coif, than to me;--
     I have spoken the word; I have sung it;--
     I have said my last farewell to thee."

And so he bade her begone with her husband.




CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN. The Swan-Songs of Cormac.

After these things the brothers turned back to Norway, and Thorvald the
Tinker made his way to Iceland. But the brothers went warfaring round
about Ireland, Wales, England and Scotland, and they were reckoned to
be the most famous of men. It was they who first built the castle of
Scarborough; they made raids into Scotland, and achieved many great
feats, and led a mighty host; and in all that host none was like Cormac
in strength and courage.

Once upon a time, after a battle, Cormac was driving the flying foe
before him while the rest of his host had gone back aboard ship. Out of
the woods there rushed against him one as monstrous big as an idol--a
Scot; and a fierce struggle began. Cormac felt for his sword, but it
had slipped out of the sheath; he was over-matched, for the giant was
possessed; but yet he reached out, caught his sword, and struck the
giant his death-blow. Then the giant cast his hands about Cormac, and
gripped his sides so hard that the ribs cracked, and he fell over, and
the dead giant on top of him, so that he could not stir. Far and wide
his folk were looking for him, but at last they found him and carried
him aboard ship. Then he made this song:--

                    (82)
     "When my manhood was matched in embraces
     With the might of yon horror, the strangler,
     Far other I found it than folding
     That fair one ye know in my arms!
     On the high-seat of heroes with Odin
     From the horn of the gods I were drinking
     O'er soon--let me speak it to warriors--
     If Skrymir had failed of his aid."

Then his wounds were looked to; they found that his ribs were broken on
both sides. He said it was no use trying to heal him, and lay there in
his wounds for a time, while his men grieved that he should have been so
unwary of his life.

He answered them in song:--

                    (83)
     "Of yore never once did I ween it,
     When I wielded the cleaver of targets,
     That sickness was fated to foil me--
     A fighter so hardy as I.
     But I shrink not, for others must share it,
     Stout shafts of the spear though they deem them,
     --O hard at my heart is the death-pang,--
     Thus hopeless the bravest may die."

And this song also:--

                    (84)
     "He came not with me in the morning,
     Thy mate, O thou fairest of women,
     When we reddened for booty the broadsword,
     So brave to the hand-grip, in Ireland:
     When the sword from its scabbard was loosened
     And sang round my cheeks in the battle
     For the feast of the Fury, and blood-drops
     Fell hot on the neb of the raven."

And then he began to fail.

This was his last song:--

                    (85)
     "There was dew from the wound smitten deeply
     That drained from the stroke of the sword-edge;
     There was red on the weapon I wielded
     In the war with the glorious and gallant:
     Yet not where the broadsword,--the blood wand,--
     Was borne by the lords of the falchion,
     But low in the straw like a laggard,
     O my lady, dishonoured I die!"

He said that his will was to give Thorgils his brother all he had,--the
goods he owned and the host he led; for he would like best, he said,
that his brother should have the use of them.

So then Cormac died. Thorgils became captain over the host, and was long
time in viking.

And so ends the story.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Life and Death of Cormac the Skald, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE AND DEATH OF CORMAC ***

***** This file should be named 265.txt or 265.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/265/

Produced by Doublas B. Killings

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
