The Project Gutenberg eBook, Fables, by Robert Louis Stevenson


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Fables


Author: Robert Louis Stevenson



Release Date: February 28, 2007  [eBook #343]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FABLES***



Transcribed from the 1901 Longmans, Green & Co. edition by David Price,
email ccx074@pglaf.org





FABLES


BY
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON




I.--THE PERSONS OF THE TALE.


After the 32nd chapter of _Treasure Island_, two of the puppets strolled
out to have a pipe before business should begin again, and met in an open
place not far from the story.

"Good-morning, Cap'n," said the first, with a man-o'-war salute, and a
beaming countenance.

"Ah, Silver!" grunted the other.  "You're in a bad way, Silver."

"Now, Cap'n Smollett," remonstrated Silver, "dooty is dooty, as I knows,
and none better; but we're off dooty now; and I can't see no call to keep
up the morality business."

"You're a damned rogue, my man," said the Captain.

"Come, come, Cap'n, be just," returned the other.  "There's no call to be
angry with me in earnest.  I'm on'y a chara'ter in a sea story.  I don't
really exist."

"Well, I don't really exist either," says the Captain, "which seems to
meet that."

"I wouldn't set no limits to what a virtuous chara'ter might consider
argument," responded Silver.  "But I'm the villain of this tale, I am;
and speaking as one sea-faring man to another, what I want to know is,
what's the odds?"

"Were you never taught your catechism?" said the Captain.  "Don't you
know there's such a thing as an Author?"

"Such a thing as a Author?" returned John, derisively.  "And who better'n
me?  And the p'int is, if the Author made you, he made Long John, and he
made Hands, and Pew, and George Merry--not that George is up to much, for
he's little more'n a name; and he made Flint, what there is of him; and
he made this here mutiny, you keep such a work about; and he had Tom
Redruth shot; and--well, if that's a Author, give me Pew!"

"Don't you believe in a future state?" said Smollett.  "Do you think
there's nothing but the present story-paper?"

"I don't rightly know for that," said Silver; "and I don't see what it's
got to do with it, anyway.  What I know is this: if there is sich a thing
as a Author, I'm his favourite chara'ter.  He does me fathoms better'n he
does you--fathoms, he does.  And he likes doing me.  He keeps me on deck
mostly all the time, crutch and all; and he leaves you measling in the
hold, where nobody can't see you, nor wants to, and you may lay to that!
If there is a Author, by thunder, but he's on my side, and you may lay to
it!"

"I see he's giving you a long rope," said the Captain.  "But that can't
change a man's convictions.  I know the Author respects me; I feel it in
my bones; when you and I had that talk at the blockhouse door, who do you
think he was for, my man?"

"And don't he respect me?" cried Silver.  "Ah, you should 'a' heard me
putting down my mutiny, George Merry and Morgan and that lot, no longer
ago'n last chapter; you'd heard something then!  You'd 'a' seen what the
Author thinks o' me!  But come now, do you consider yourself a virtuous
chara'ter clean through?"

"God forbid!" said Captain Smollett, solemnly.  "I am a man that tries to
do his duty, and makes a mess of it as often as not.  I'm not a very
popular man at home, Silver, I'm afraid!" and the Captain sighed.

"Ah," says Silver.  "Then how about this sequel of yours?  Are you to be
Cap'n Smollett just the same as ever, and not very popular at home, says
you?  And if so, why, it's _Treasure Island_ over again, by thunder; and
I'll be Long John, and Pew'll be Pew, and we'll have another mutiny, as
like as not.  Or are you to be somebody else?  And if so, why, what the
better are you? and what the worse am I?"

"Why, look here, my man," returned the Captain, "I can't understand how
this story comes about at all, can I?  I can't see how you and I, who
don't exist, should get to speaking here, and smoke our pipes for all the
world like reality?  Very well, then, who am I to pipe up with my
opinions?  I know the Author's on the side of good; he tells me so, it
runs out of his pen as he writes.  Well, that's all I need to know; I'll
take my chance upon the rest."

"It's a fact he seemed to be against George Merry," Silver admitted,
musingly.  "But George is little more'n a name at the best of it," he
added, brightening.  "And to get into soundings for once.  What is this
good?  I made a mutiny, and I been a gentleman o' fortune; well, but by
all stories, you ain't no such saint.  I'm a man that keeps company very
easy; even by your own account, you ain't, and to my certain knowledge
you're a devil to haze.  Which is which?  Which is good, and which bad?
Ah, you tell me that!  Here we are in stays, and you may lay to it!"

"We're none of us perfect," replied the Captain.  "That's a fact of
religion, my man.  All I can say is, I try to do my duty; and if you try
to do yours, I can't compliment you on your success."

"And so you was the judge, was you?" said Silver, derisively.

"I would be both judge and hangman for you, my man, and never turn a
hair," returned the Captain.  "But I get beyond that: it mayn't be sound
theology, but it's common sense, that what is good is useful too--or
there and thereabout, for I don't set up to be a thinker.  Now, where
would a story go to if there were no virtuous characters?"

"If you go to that," replied Silver, "where would a story begin, if there
wasn't no villains?"

"Well, that's pretty much my thought," said Captain Smollett.  "The
Author has to get a story; that's what he wants; and to get a story, and
to have a man like the doctor (say) given a proper chance, he has to put
in men like you and Hands.  But he's on the right side; and you mind your
eye!  You're not through this story yet; there's trouble coming for you."

"What'll you bet?" asked John.

"Much I care if there ain't," returned the Captain.  "I'm glad enough to
be Alexander Smollett, bad as he is; and I thank my stars upon my knees
that I'm not Silver.  But there's the ink-bottle opening.  To quarters!"

And indeed the Author was just then beginning to write the words:

   CHAPTER XXXIII.




II.--THE SINKING SHIP.


"Sir," said the first lieutenant, bursting into the Captain's cabin, "the
ship is going down."

"Very well, Mr. Spoker," said the Captain; "but that is no reason for
going about half-shaved.  Exercise your mind a moment, Mr. Spoker, and
you will see that to the philosophic eye there is nothing new in our
position: the ship (if she is to go down at all) may be said to have been
going down since she was launched."

"She is settling fast," said the first lieutenant, as he returned from
shaving.

"Fast, Mr. Spoker?" asked the Captain.  "The expression is a strange one,
for time (if you will think of it) is only relative."

"Sir," said the lieutenant, "I think it is scarcely worth while to embark
in such a discussion when we shall all be in Davy Jones's Locker in ten
minutes."

"By parity of reasoning," returned the Captain gently, "it would never be
worth while to begin any inquiry of importance; the odds are always
overwhelming that we must die before we shall have brought it to an end.
You have not considered, Mr. Spoker, the situation of man," said the
Captain, smiling, and shaking his head.

"I am much more engaged in considering the position of the ship," said
Mr. Spoker.

"Spoken like a good officer," replied the Captain, laying his hand on the
lieutenant's shoulder.

On deck they found the men had broken into the spirit-room, and were fast
getting drunk.

"My men," said the Captain, "there is no sense in this.  The ship is
going down, you will tell me, in ten minutes: well, and what then?  To
the philosophic eye, there is nothing new in our position.  All our lives
long, we may have been about to break a blood-vessel or to be struck by
lightning, not merely in ten minutes, but in ten seconds; and that has
not prevented us from eating dinner, no, nor from putting money in the
Savings Bank.  I assure you, with my hand on my heart, I fail to
comprehend your attitude."

The men were already too far gone to pay much heed.

"This is a very painful sight, Mr. Spoker," said the Captain.

"And yet to the philosophic eye, or whatever it is," replied the first
lieutenant, "they may be said to have been getting drunk since they came
aboard."

"I do not know if you always follow my thought, Mr. Spoker," returned the
Captain gently.  "But let us proceed."

In the powder magazine they found an old salt smoking his pipe.

"Good God," cried the Captain, "what are you about?"

"Well, sir," said the old salt, apologetically, "they told me as she were
going down."

"And suppose she were?" said the Captain.  "To the philosophic eye, there
would be nothing new in our position.  Life, my old shipmate, life, at
any moment and in any view, is as dangerous as a sinking ship; and yet it
is man's handsome fashion to carry umbrellas, to wear indiarubber over-
shoes, to begin vast works, and to conduct himself in every way as if he
might hope to be eternal.  And for my own poor part I should despise the
man who, even on board a sinking ship, should omit to take a pill or to
wind up his watch.  That, my friend, would not be the human attitude."

"I beg pardon, sir," said Mr. Spoker.  "But what is precisely the
difference between shaving in a sinking ship and smoking in a powder
magazine?"

"Or doing anything at all in any conceivable circumstances?" cried the
Captain.  "Perfectly conclusive; give me a cigar!"

Two minutes afterwards the ship blew up with a glorious detonation.




III--THE TWO MATCHES.


One day there was a traveller in the woods in California, in the dry
season, when the Trades were blowing strong.  He had ridden a long way,
and he was tired and hungry, and dismounted from his horse to smoke a
pipe.  But when he felt in his pocket he found but two matches.  He
struck the first, and it would not light.

"Here is a pretty state of things!" said the traveller.  "Dying for a
smoke; only one match left; and that certain to miss fire!  Was there
ever a creature so unfortunate?  And yet," thought the traveller,
"suppose I light this match, and smoke my pipe, and shake out the dottle
here in the grass--the grass might catch on fire, for it is dry like
tinder; and while I snatch out the flames in front, they might evade and
run behind me, and seize upon yon bush of poison oak; before I could
reach it, that would have blazed up; over the bush I see a pine tree hung
with moss; that too would fly in fire upon the instant to its topmost
bough; and the flame of that long torch--how would the trade wind take
and brandish that through the inflammable forest!  I hear this dell roar
in a moment with the joint voice of wind and fire, I see myself gallop
for my soul, and the flying conflagration chase and outflank me through
the hills; I see this pleasant forest burn for days, and the cattle
roasted, and the springs dried up, and the farmer ruined, and his
children cast upon the world.  What a world hangs upon this moment!"

With that he struck the match, and it missed fire.

"Thank God!" said the traveller, and put his pipe in his pocket.




IV.--THE SICK MAN AND THE FIREMAN.


There was once a sick man in a burning house, to whom there entered a
fireman.

"Do not save me," said the sick man.  "Save those who are strong."

"Will you kindly tell me why?" inquired the fireman, for he was a civil
fellow.

"Nothing could possibly be fairer," said the sick man.  "The strong
should be preferred in all cases, because they are of more service in the
world."

The fireman pondered a while, for he was a man of some philosophy.
"Granted," said he at last, as apart of the roof fell in; "but for the
sake of conversation, what would you lay down as the proper service of
the strong?"

"Nothing can possibly be easier," returned the sick man; "the proper
service of the strong is to help the weak."

Again the fireman reflected, for there was nothing hasty about this
excellent creature.  "I could forgive you being sick," he said at last,
as a portion of the wall fell out, "but I cannot bear your being such a
fool."  And with that he heaved up his fireman's axe, for he was
eminently just, and clove the sick man to the bed.




V.--THE DEVIL AND THE INNKEEPER.


Once upon a time the devil stayed at an inn, where no one knew him, for
they were people whose education had been neglected.  He was bent on
mischief, and for a time kept everybody by the ears.  But at last the
innkeeper set a watch upon the devil and took him in the fact.

The innkeeper got a rope's end.

"Now I am going to thrash you," said the innkeeper.

"You have no right to be angry with me," said the devil.  "I am only the
devil, and it is my nature to do wrong."

"Is that so?" asked the innkeeper.

"Fact, I assure you," said the devil.

"You really cannot help doing ill?" asked the innkeeper.

"Not in the smallest," said the devil; "it would be useless cruelty to
thrash a thing like me."

"It would indeed," said the innkeeper.

And he made a noose and hanged the devil.

"There!" said the innkeeper.




VI.--THE PENITENT


A man met a lad weeping.  "What do you weep for?" he asked.

"I am weeping for my sins," said the lad.

"You must have little to do," said the man.

The next day they met again.  Once more the lad was weeping.  "Why do you
weep now?" asked the man.

"I am weeping because I have nothing to eat," said the lad.

"I thought it would come to that," said the man.




VII.--THE YELLOW PAINT.


In a certain city there lived a physician who sold yellow paint.  This
was of so singular a virtue that whoso was bedaubed with it from head to
heel was set free from the dangers of life, and the bondage of sin, and
the fear of death for ever.  So the physician said in his prospectus; and
so said all the citizens in the city; and there was nothing more urgent
in men's hearts than to be properly painted themselves, and nothing they
took more delight in than to see others painted.  There was in the same
city a young man of a very good family but of a somewhat reckless life,
who had reached the age of manhood, and would have nothing to say to the
paint: "To-morrow was soon enough," said he; and when the morrow came he
would still put it off.  She might have continued to do until his death;
only, he had a friend of about his own age and much of his own manners;
and this youth, taking a walk in the public street, with not one fleck of
paint upon his body, was suddenly run down by a water-cart and cut off in
the heyday of his nakedness.  This shook the other to the soul; so that I
never beheld a man more earnest to be painted; and on the very same
evening, in the presence of all his family, to appropriate music, and
himself weeping aloud, he received three complete coats and a touch of
varnish on the top.  The physician (who was himself affected even to
tears) protested he had never done a job so thorough.

Some two months afterwards, the young man was carried on a stretcher to
the physician's house.

"What is the meaning of this?" he cried, as soon as the door was opened.
"I was to be set free from all the dangers of life; and here have I been
run down by that self-same water-cart, and my leg is broken."

"Dear me!" said the physician.  "This is very sad.  But I perceive I must
explain to you the action of my paint.  A broken bone is a mighty small
affair at the worst of it; and it belongs to a class of accident to which
my paint is quite inapplicable.  Sin, my dear young friend, sin is the
sole calamity that a wise man should apprehend; it is against sin that I
have fitted you out; and when you come to be tempted, you will give me
news of my paint."

"Oh!" said the young man, "I did not understand that, and it seems rather
disappointing.  But I have no doubt all is for the best; and in the
meanwhile, I shall be obliged to you if you will set my leg."

"That is none of my business," said the physician; "but if your bearers
will carry you round the corner to the surgeon's, I feel sure he will
afford relief."

Some three years later, the young man came running to the physician's
house in a great perturbation.  "What is the meaning of this?" he cried.
"Here was I to be set free from the bondage of sin; and I have just
committed forgery, arson and murder."

"Dear me," said the physician.  "This is very serious.  Off with your
clothes at once."  And as soon as the young man had stripped, he examined
him from head to foot.  "No," he cried with great relief, "there is not a
flake broken.  Cheer up, my young friend, your paint is as good as new."

"Good God!" cried the young man, "and what then can be the use of it?"

"Why," said the physician, "I perceive I must explain to you the nature
of the action of my paint.  It does not exactly prevent sin; it
extenuates instead the painful consequences.  It is not so much for this
world, as for the next; it is not against life; in short, it is against
death that I have fitted you out.  And when you come to die, you will
give me news of my paint."

"Oh!" cried the young man, "I had not understood that, and it seems a
little disappointing.  But there is no doubt all is for the best: and in
the meanwhile, I shall be obliged if you will help me to undo the evil I
have brought on innocent persons."

"That is none of my business," said the physician; "but if you will go
round the corner to the police office, I feel sure it will afford you
relief to give yourself up."

Six weeks later, the physician was called to the town gaol.

"What is the meaning of this?" cried the young man.  "Here am I literally
crusted with your paint; and I have broken my leg, and committed all the
crimes in the calendar, and must be hanged to-morrow; and am in the
meanwhile in a fear so extreme that I lack words to picture it."

"Dear me," said the physician.  "This is really amazing.  Well, well;
perhaps, if you had not been painted, you would have been more frightened
still."




VIII.--THE HOUSE OF ELD.


So soon as the child began to speak, the gyve was riveted; and the boys
and girls limped about their play like convicts.  Doubtless it was more
pitiable to see and more painful to bear in youth; but even the grown
folk, besides being very unhandy on their feet, were often sick with
ulcers.

About the time when Jack was ten years old, many strangers began to
journey through that country.  These he beheld going lightly by on the
long roads, and the thing amazed him.  "I wonder how it comes," he asked,
"that all these strangers are so quick afoot, and we must drag about our
fetter?"

"My dear boy," said his uncle, the catechist, "do not complain about your
fetter, for it is the only thing that makes life worth living.  None are
happy, none are good, none are respectable, that are not gyved like us.
And I must tell you, besides, it is very dangerous talk.  If you grumble
of your iron, you will have no luck; if ever you take it off, you will be
instantly smitten by a thunderbolt."

"Are there no thunderbolts for these strangers?" asked Jack.

"Jupiter is longsuffering to the benighted," returned the catechist.

"Upon my word, I could wish I had been less fortunate," said Jack.  "For
if I had been born benighted, I might now be going free; and it cannot be
denied the iron is inconvenient, and the ulcer hurts."

"Ah!" cried his uncle, "do not envy the heathen!  Theirs is a sad lot!
Ah, poor souls, if they but knew the joys of being fettered!  Poor souls,
my heart yearns for them.  But the truth is they are vile, odious,
insolent, ill-conditioned, stinking brutes, not truly human--for what is
a man without a fetter?--and you cannot be too particular not to touch or
speak with them."

After this talk, the child would never pass one of the unfettered on the
road but what he spat at him and called him names, which was the practice
of the children in that part.

It chanced one day, when he was fifteen, he went into the woods, and the
ulcer pained him.  It was a fair day, with a blue sky; all the birds were
singing; but Jack nursed his foot.  Presently, another song began; it
sounded like the singing of a person, only far more gay; at the same time
there was a beating on the earth.  Jack put aside the leaves; and there
was a lad of his own village, leaping, and dancing and singing to himself
in a green dell; and on the grass beside him lay the dancer's iron.

"Oh!" cried Jack, "you have your fetter off!"

"For God's sake, don't tell your uncle!" cried the lad.

"If you fear my uncle," returned Jack "why do you not fear the
thunderbolt"?

"That is only an old wives' tale," said the other.  "It is only told to
children.  Scores of us come here among the woods and dance for nights
together, and are none the worse."

This put Jack in a thousand new thoughts.  He was a grave lad; he had no
mind to dance himself; he wore his fetter manfully, and tended his ulcer
without complaint.  But he loved the less to be deceived or to see others
cheated.  He began to lie in wait for heathen travellers, at covert parts
of the road, and in the dusk of the day, so that he might speak with them
unseen; and these were greatly taken with their wayside questioner, and
told him things of weight.  The wearing of gyves (they said) was no
command of Jupiter's.  It was the contrivance of a white-faced thing, a
sorcerer, that dwelt in that country in the Wood of Eld.  He was one like
Glaucus that could change his shape, yet he could be always told; for
when he was crossed, he gobbled like a turkey.  He had three lives; but
the third smiting would make an end of him indeed; and with that his
house of sorcery would vanish, the gyves fall, and the villagers take
hands and dance like children.

"And in your country?" Jack would ask.

But at this the travellers, with one accord, would put him off; until
Jack began to suppose there was no land entirely happy.  Or, if there
were, it must be one that kept its folk at home; which was natural
enough.

But the case of the gyves weighed upon him.  The sight of the children
limping stuck in his eyes; the groans of such as dressed their ulcers
haunted him.  And it came at last in his mind that he was born to free
them.

There was in that village a sword of heavenly forgery, beaten upon
Vulcan's anvil.  It was never used but in the temple, and then the flat
of it only; and it hung on a nail by the catechist's chimney.  Early one
night, Jack rose, and took the sword, and was gone out of the house and
the village in the darkness.

All night he walked at a venture; and when day came, he met strangers
going to the fields.  Then he asked after the Wood of Eld and the house
of sorcery; and one said north, and one south; until Jack saw that they
deceived him.  So then, when he asked his way of any man, he showed the
bright sword naked; and at that the gyve on the man's ankle rang, and
answered in his stead; and the word was still _Straight on_.  But the
man, when his gyve spoke, spat and struck at Jack, and threw stones at
him as he went away; so that his head was broken.

So he came to that wood, and entered in, and he was aware of a house in a
low place, where funguses grew, and the trees met, and the steaming of
the marsh arose about it like a smoke.  It was a fine house, and a very
rambling; some parts of it were ancient like the hills, and some but of
yesterday, and none finished; and all the ends of it were open, so that
you could go in from every side.  Yet it was in good repair, and all the
chimneys smoked.

Jack went in through the gable; and there was one room after another, all
bare, but all furnished in part, so that a man could dwell there; and in
each there was a fire burning, where a man could warm himself, and a
table spread where he might eat.  But Jack saw nowhere any living
creature; only the bodies of some stuffed.

"This is a hospitable house," said Jack; "but the ground must be quaggy
underneath, for at every step the building quakes."

He had gone some time in the house, when he began to be hungry.  Then he
looked at the food, and at first he was afraid; but he bared the sword,
and by the shining of the sword, it seemed the food was honest.  So he
took the courage to sit down and eat, and he was refreshed in mind and
body.

"This is strange," thought he, "that in the house of sorcery there should
be food so wholesome."

As he was yet eating, there came into that room the appearance of his
uncle, and Jack was afraid because he had taken the sword.  But his uncle
was never more kind, and sat down to meat with him, and praised him
because he had taken the sword.  Never had these two been more pleasantly
together, and Jack was full of love to the man.

"It was very well done," said his uncle, "to take the sword and come
yourself into the House of Eld; a good thought and a brave deed.  But now
you are satisfied; and we may go home to dinner arm in arm."

"Oh, dear, no!" said Jack.  "I am not satisfied yet."

"How!" cried his uncle.  "Are you not warmed by the fire?  Does not this
food sustain you?"

"I see the food to be wholesome," said Jack; "and still it is no proof
that a man should wear a gyve on his right leg."

Now at this the appearance of his uncle gobbled like a turkey.

"Jupiter!" cried Jack, "is this the sorcerer?"

His hand held back and his heart failed him for the love he bore his
uncle; but he heaved up the sword and smote the appearance on the head;
and it cried out aloud with the voice of his uncle; and fell to the
ground; and a little bloodless white thing fled from the room.

The cry rang in Jack's ears, and his knees smote together, and conscience
cried upon him; and yet he was strengthened, and there woke in his bones
the lust of that enchanter's blood.  "If the gyves are to fall," said he,
"I must go through with this, and when I get home I shall find my uncle
dancing."

So he went on after the bloodless thing.  In the way, he met the
appearance of his father; and his father was incensed, and railed upon
him, and called to him upon his duty, and bade him be home, while there
was yet time.  "For you can still," said he, "be home by sunset; and then
all will be forgiven."

"God knows," said Jack, "I fear your anger; but yet your anger does not
prove that a man should wear a gyve on his right leg."

And at that the appearance of his father gobbled like a turkey.

"Ah, heaven," cried Jack, "the sorcerer again!"

The blood ran backward in his body and his joints rebelled against him
for the love he bore his father; but he heaved up the sword, and plunged
it in the heart of the appearance; and the appearance cried out aloud
with the voice of his father; and fell to the ground; and a little
bloodless white thing fled from the room.

The cry rang in Jack's ears, and his soul was darkened; but now rage came
to him.  "I have done what I dare not think upon," said he.  "I will go
to an end with it, or perish.  And when I get home, I pray God this may
be a dream, and I may find my father dancing."

So he went on after the bloodless thing that had escaped; and in the way
he met the appearance of his mother, and she wept.  "What have you done?"
she cried.  "What is this that you have done?  Oh, come home (where you
may be by bedtime) ere you do more ill to me and mine; for it is enough
to smite my brother and your father."

"Dear mother, it is not these that I have smitten," said Jack; "it was
but the enchanter in their shape.  And even if I had, it would not prove
that a man should wear a gyve on his right leg."

And at this the appearance gobbled like a turkey.

He never knew how he did that; but he swung the sword on the one side,
and clove the appearance through the midst; and it cried out aloud with
the voice of his mother; and fell to the ground; and with the fall of it,
the house was gone from over Jack's head, and he stood alone in the
woods, and the gyve was loosened from his leg.

"Well," said he, "the enchanter is now dead, and the fetter gone."  But
the cries rang in his soul, and the day was like night to him.  "This has
been a sore business," said he.  "Let me get forth out of the wood, and
see the good that I have done to others."

He thought to leave the fetter where it lay, but when he turned to go,
his mind was otherwise.  So he stooped and put the gyve in his bosom; and
the rough iron galled him as he went, and his bosom bled.

Now when he was forth of the wood upon the highway, he met folk returning
from the field; and those he met had no fetter on the right leg, but,
behold! they had one upon the left.  Jack asked them what it signified;
and they said, "that was the new wear, for the old was found to be a
superstition".  Then he looked at them nearly; and there was a new ulcer
on the left ankle, and the old one on the right was not yet healed.

"Now, may God forgive me!" cried Jack.  "I would I were well home."

And when he was home, there lay his uncle smitten on the head, and his
father pierced through the heart, and his mother cloven through the
midst.  And he sat in the lone house and wept beside the bodies.



MORAL.


Old is the tree and the fruit good,
Very old and thick the wood.
Woodman, is your courage stout?
Beware! the root is wrapped about
Your mother's heart, your father's bones;
And like the mandrake comes with groans.




IX.--THE FOUR REFORMERS.


Four reformers met under a bramble bush.  They were all agreed the world
must be changed.  "We must abolish property," said one.

"We must abolish marriage," said the second.

"We must abolish God," said the third.

"I wish we could abolish work," said the fourth.

"Do not let us get beyond practical politics," said the first.  "The
first thing is to reduce men to a common level."

"The first thing," said the second, "is to give freedom to the sexes."

"The first thing," said the third, "is to find out how to do it."

"The first step," said the first, "is to abolish the Bible."

"The first thing," said the second, "is to abolish the laws."

"The first thing," said the third, "is to abolish mankind."




X.--THE MAN AND HIS FRIEND.


A man quarrelled with his friend.

"I have been much deceived in you," said the man.

And the friend made a face at him and went away.

A little after, they both died, and came together before the great white
Justice of the Peace.  It began to look black for the friend, but the man
for a while had a clear character and was getting in good spirits.

"I find here some record of a quarrel," said the justice, looking in his
notes.  "Which of you was in the wrong?"

"He was," said the man.  "He spoke ill of me behind my back."

"Did he so?" said the justice.  "And pray how did he speak about your
neighbours?"

"Oh, he had always a nasty tongue," said the man.

"And you chose him for your friend?" cried the justice.  "My good fellow,
we have no use here for fools."

So the man was cast in the pit, and the friend laughed out aloud in the
dark and remained to be tried on other charges.




XI.--THE READER.


"I never read such an impious book," said the reader, throwing it on the
floor.

"You need not hurt me," said the book; "you will only get less for me
second hand, and I did not write myself."

"That is true," said the reader.  "My quarrel is with your author."

"Ah, well," said the book, "you need not buy his rant."

"That is true," said the reader.  "But I thought him such a cheerful
writer."

"I find him so," said the book.

"You must be differently made from me," said the reader.

"Let me tell you a fable," said the book.  "There were two men wrecked
upon a desert island; one of them made believe he was at home, the other
admitted--"

"Oh, I know your kind of fable," said the reader.  "They both died."

"And so they did," said the book.  "No doubt of that.  And everybody
else."

"That is true," said the reader.  "Push it a little further for this
once.  And when they were all dead?"

"They were in God's hands, the same as before," said the book.

"Not much to boast of, by your account," cried the reader.

"Who is impious now?" said the book.

And the reader put him on the fire.

   The coward crouches from the rod,
   And loathes the iron face of God.




XII.--THE CITIZEN AND THE TRAVELLER.


"Look round you," said the citizen.  "This is the largest market in the
world."

"Oh, surely not," said the traveller.

"Well, perhaps not the largest," said the citizen, "but much the best."

"You are certainly wrong there," said the traveller.  "I can tell you . .
."

They buried the stranger at the dusk.




XIII.--THE DISTINGUISHED STRANGER.


Once upon a time there came to this earth a visitor from a neighbouring
planet.  And he was met at the place of his descent by a great
philosopher, who was to show him everything.

First of all they came through a wood, and the stranger looked upon the
trees.  "Whom have we here?" said he.

"These are only vegetables," said the philosopher.  "They are alive, but
not at all interesting."

"I don't know about that," said the stranger.  "They seem to have very
good manners.  Do they never speak?"

"They lack the gift," said the philosopher.

"Yet I think I hear them sing," said the other.

"That is only the wind among the leaves," said the philosopher.  "I will
explain to you the theory of winds: it is very interesting."

"Well," said the stranger, "I wish I knew what they are thinking."

"They cannot think," said the philosopher.

"I don't know about that," returned the stranger: and then, laying his
hand upon a trunk: "I like these people," said he.

"They are not people at all," said the philosopher.  "Come along."

Next they came through a meadow where there were cows.

"These are very dirty people," said the stranger.

"They are not people at all," said the philosopher; and he explained what
a cow is in scientific words which I have forgotten.

"That is all one to me," said the stranger.  "But why do they never look
up?"

"Because they are graminivorous," said the philosopher; "and to live upon
grass, which is not highly nutritious, requires so close an attention to
business that they have no time to think, or speak, or look at the
scenery, or keep themselves clean."

"Well," said the stranger, "that is one way to live, no doubt.  But I
prefer the people with the green heads."

Next they came into a city, and the streets were full of men and women.

"These are very odd people," said the stranger.

"They are the people of the greatest nation in the world," said the
philosopher.

"Are they indeed?" said the stranger.  "They scarcely look so."




XIV.--THE CART-HORSES AND THE SADDLE-HORSE.


Two cart-horses, a gelding and a mare, were brought to Samoa, and put in
the same field with a saddle-horse to run free on the island.  They were
rather afraid to go near him, for they saw he was a saddle-horse, and
supposed he would not speak to them.  Now the saddle-horse had never seen
creatures so big.  "These must be great chiefs," thought he, and he
approached them civilly.  "Lady and gentleman," said he, "I understand
you are from the colonies.  I offer you my affectionate compliments, and
make you heartily welcome to the islands."

The colonials looked at him askance, and consulted with each other.

"Who can he be?" said the gelding.

"He seems suspiciously civil," said the mare.

"I do not think he can be much account," said the gelding.

"Depend upon it he is only a Kanaka," said the mare.

Then they turned to him.

"Go to the devil!" said the gelding.

"I wonder at your impudence, speaking to persons of our quality!" cried
the mare.

The saddle-horse went away by himself.  "I was right," said he, "they are
great chiefs."




XV.--THE TADPOLE AND THE FROG.


"Be ashamed of yourself," said the frog.

"When I was a tadpole, I had no tail."

"Just what I thought!" said the tadpole.

"You never were a tadpole."




XVI.--SOMETHING IN IT.


The natives told him many tales.  In particular, they warned him of the
house of yellow reeds tied with black sinnet, how any one who touched it
became instantly the prey of Akaanga, and was handed on to him by Miru
the ruddy, and hocussed with the kava of the dead, and baked in the ovens
and eaten by the eaters of the dead.

"There is nothing in it," said the missionary.

There was a bay upon that island, a very fair bay to look upon; but, by
the native saying, it was death to bathe there.  "There is nothing in
that," said the missionary; and he came to the bay, and went swimming.
Presently an eddy took him and bore him towards the reef.  "Oho!" thought
the missionary, "it seems there is something in it after all."  And he
swam the harder, but the eddy carried him away.  "I do not care about
this eddy," said the missionary; and even as he said it, he was aware of
a house raised on piles above the sea; it was built of yellow reeds, one
reed joined with another, and the whole bound with black sinnet; a ladder
led to the door, and all about the house hung calabashes.  He had never
seen such a house, nor yet such calabashes; and the eddy set for the
ladder.  "This is singular," said the missionary, "but there can be
nothing in it."  And he laid hold of the ladder and went up.  It was a
fine house; but there was no man there; and when the missionary looked
back he saw no island, only the heaving of the sea.  "It is strange about
the island," said the missionary, "but who's afraid? my stories are the
true ones."  And he laid hold of a calabash, for he was one that loved
curiosities.  Now he had no sooner laid hand upon the calabash than that
which he handled, and that which he saw and stood on, burst like a bubble
and was gone; and night closed upon him, and the waters, and the meshes
of the net; and he wallowed there like a fish.

"A body would think there was something in this," said the missionary.
"But if these tales are true, I wonder what about my tales!"

Now the flaming of Akaanga's torch drew near in the night; and the
misshapen hands groped in the meshes of the net; and they took the
missionary between the finger and the thumb, and bore him dripping in the
night and silence to the place of the ovens of Miru.  And there was Miru,
ruddy in the glow of the ovens; and there sat her four daughters, and
made the kava of the dead; and there sat the comers out of the islands of
the living, dripping and lamenting.

This was a dread place to reach for any of the sons of men.  But of all
who ever came there, the missionary was the most concerned; and, to make
things worse, the person next him was a convert of his own.

"Aha," said the convert, "so you are here like your neighbours?  And how
about all your stories?"

"It seems," said the missionary, with bursting tears, "that there was
nothing in them."

By this the kava of the dead was ready, and the daughters of Miru began
to intone in the old manner of singing.  "Gone are the green islands and
the bright sea, the sun and the moon and the forty million stars, and
life and love and hope.  Henceforth is no more, only to sit in the night
and silence, and see your friends devoured; for life is a deceit, and the
bandage is taken from your eyes."

Now when the singing was done, one of the daughters came with the bowl.
Desire of that kava rose in the missionary's bosom; he lusted for it like
a swimmer for the land, or a bridegroom for his bride; and he reached out
his hand, and took the bowl, and would have drunk.  And then he
remembered, and put it back.

"Drink!" sang the daughter of Miru.

"There is no kava like the kava of the dead, and to drink of it once is
the reward of living."

"I thank you.  It smells excellent," said the missionary.  "But I am a
blue-ribbon man myself; and though I am aware there is a difference of
opinion even in our own confession, I have always held kava to be
excluded."

"What!" cried the convert.  "Are you going to respect a taboo at a time
like this?  And you were always so opposed to taboos when you were
alive!"

"To other people's," said the missionary.  "Never to my own."

"But yours have all proved wrong," said the convert.

"It looks like it," said the missionary, "and I can't help that.  No
reason why I should break my word."

"I never heard the like of this!" cried the daughter of Miru.  "Pray,
what do you expect to gain?"

"That is not the point," said the missionary.  "I took this pledge for
others, I am not going to break it for myself."

The daughter of Miru was puzzled; she came and told her mother, and Miru
was vexed; and they went and told Akaanga.  "I don't know what to do
about this," said Akaanga; and he came and reasoned with the missionary.

"But there _is_ such a thing as right and wrong," said the missionary;
"and your ovens cannot alter that."

"Give the kava to the rest," said Akaanga to the daughters of Miru.  "I
must get rid of this sea-lawyer instantly, or worse will come of it."

The next moment the missionary came up in the midst of the sea, and there
before him were the palm trees of the island.  He swam to the shore
gladly, and landed.  Much matter of thought was in that missionary's
mind.

"I seem to have been misinformed upon some points," said he.  "Perhaps
there is not much in it, as I supposed; but there is something in it
after all.  Let me be glad of that."

And he rang the bell for service.



MORAL.


The sticks break, the stones crumble,
The eternal altars tilt and tumble,
Sanctions and tales dislimn like mist
About the amazed evangelist.
He stands unshook from age to youth
Upon one pin-point of the truth.




XVII.--FAITH, HALF FAITH AND NO FAITH AT ALL.


In the ancient days there went three men upon pilgrimage; one was a
priest, and one was a virtuous person, and the third was an old rover
with his axe.

As they went, the priest spoke about the grounds of faith.

"We find the proofs of our religion in the works of nature," said he, and
beat his breast.

"That is true," said the virtuous person.

"The peacock has a scrannel voice," said the priest, "as has been laid
down always in our books.  How cheering!" he cried, in a voice like one
that wept.  "How comforting!"

"I require no such proofs," said the virtuous person.

"Then you have no reasonable faith," said the priest.

"Great is the right, and shall prevail!" cried the virtuous person.
"There is loyalty in my soul; be sure, there is loyalty in the mind of
Odin."

"These are but playings upon words," returned the priest.  "A sackful of
such trash is nothing to the peacock."

Just then they passed a country farm, where there was a peacock seated on
a rail; and the bird opened its mouth and sang with the voice of a
nightingale.

"Where are you now?" asked the virtuous person.  "And yet this shakes not
me!  Great is the truth, and shall prevail!"

"The devil fly away with that peacock!" said the priest; and he was
downcast for a mile or two.

But presently they came to a shrine, where a Fakeer performed miracles.

"Ah!" said the priest, "here are the true grounds of faith.  The peacock
was but an adminicle.  This is the base of our religion."

And he beat upon his breast, and groaned like one with colic.

"Now to me," said the virtuous person, "all this is as little to the
purpose as the peacock.  I believe because I see the right is great and
must prevail; and this Fakeer might carry on with his conjuring tricks
till doomsday, and it would not play bluff upon a man like me."

Now at this the Fakeer was so much incensed that his hand trembled; and,
lo! in the midst of a miracle the cards fell from up his sleeve.

"Where are you now?" asked the virtuous person.  "And yet it shakes not
me!"

"The devil fly away with the Fakeer!" cried the priest.  "I really do not
see the good of going on with this pilgrimage."

"Cheer up!" cried the virtuous person.  "Great is the right, and shall
prevail!"

"If you are quite sure it will prevail," says the priest.

"I pledge my word for that," said the virtuous person.

So the other began to go on again with a better heart.

At last one came running, and told them all was lost: that the powers of
darkness had besieged the Heavenly Mansions, that Odin was to die, and
evil triumph.

"I have been grossly deceived," cried the virtuous person.

"All is lost now," said the priest.

"I wonder if it is too late to make it up with the devil?" said the
virtuous person.

"Oh, I hope not," said the priest.  "And at any rate we can but try.  But
what are you doing with your axe?" says he to the rover.

"I am off to die with Odin," said the rover.




XVIII.--THE TOUCHSTONE.


The King was a man that stood well before the world; his smile was sweet
as clover, but his soul withinsides was as little as a pea.  He had two
sons; and the younger son was a boy after his heart, but the elder was
one whom he feared.  It befell one morning that the drum sounded in the
dun before it was yet day; and the King rode with his two sons, and a
brave array behind them.  They rode two hours, and came to the foot of a
brown mountain that was very steep.

"Where do we ride?" said the elder son.

"Across this brown mountain," said the King, and smiled to himself.

"My father knows what he is doing," said the younger son.

And they rode two hours more, and came to the sides of a black river that
was wondrous deep.

"And where do we ride?" asked the elder son.

"Over this black river," said the King, and smiled to himself.

"My father knows what he is doing," said the younger son.

And they rode all that day, and about the time of the sunsetting came to
the side of a lake, where was a great dun.

"It is here we ride," said the King; "to a King's house, and a priest's,
and a house where you will learn much."

At the gates of the dun, the King who was a priest met them; and he was a
grave man, and beside him stood his daughter, and she was as fair as the
morn, and one that smiled and looked down.

"These are my two sons," said the first King.

"And here is my daughter," said the King who was a priest.

"She is a wonderful fine maid," said the first King, "and I like her
manner of smiling,"

"They are wonderful well-grown lads," said the second, "and I like their
gravity."

And then the two Kings looked at each other, and said, "The thing may
come about".

And in the meanwhile the two lads looked upon the maid, and the one grew
pale and the other red; and the maid looked upon the ground smiling.

"Here is the maid that I shall marry," said the elder.  "For I think she
smiled upon me."

But the younger plucked his father by the sleeve.  "Father," said he, "a
word in your ear.  If I find favour in your sight, might not I wed this
maid, for I think she smiles upon me?"

"A word in yours," said the King his father.  "Waiting is good hunting,
and when the teeth are shut the tongue is at home."

Now they were come into the dun, and feasted; and this was a great house,
so that the lads were astonished; and the King that was a priest sat at
the end of the board and was silent, so that the lads were filled with
reverence; and the maid served them smiling with downcast eyes, so that
their hearts were enlarged.

Before it was day, the elder son arose, and he found the maid at her
weaving, for she was a diligent girl.  "Maid," quoth he, "I would fain
marry you."

"You must speak with my father," said she, and she looked upon the ground
smiling, and became like the rose.

"Her heart is with me," said the elder son, and he went down to the lake
and sang.

A little after came the younger son.  "Maid," quoth he, "if our fathers
were agreed, I would like well to marry you."

"You can speak to my father," said she; and looked upon the ground, and
smiled and grew like the rose.

"She is a dutiful daughter," said the younger son, "she will make an
obedient wife."  And then he thought, "What shall I do?" and he
remembered the King her father was a priest; so he went into the temple,
and sacrificed a weasel and a hare.

Presently the news got about; and the two lads and the first King were
called into the presence of the King who was a priest, where he sat upon
the high seat.

"Little I reck of gear," said the King who was a priest, "and little of
power.  For we live here among the shadow of things, and the heart is
sick of seeing them.  And we stay here in the wind like raiment drying,
and the heart is weary of the wind.  But one thing I love, and that is
truth; and for one thing will I give my daughter, and that is the trial
stone.  For in the light of that stone the seeming goes, and the being
shows, and all things besides are worthless.  Therefore, lads, if ye
would wed my daughter, out foot, and bring me the stone of touch, for
that is the price of her."

"A word in your ear," said the younger son to his father.  "I think we do
very well without this stone."

"A word in yours," said the father.  "I am of your way of thinking; but
when the teeth are shut the tongue is at home."  And he smiled to the
King that was a priest.

But the elder son got to his feet, and called the King that was a priest
by the name of father.  "For whether I marry the maid or no, I will call
you by that word for the love of your wisdom; and even now I will ride
forth and search the world for the stone of touch."  So he said farewell,
and rode into the world.

"I think I will go, too," said the younger son, "if I can have your
leave.  For my heart goes out to the maid."

"You will ride home with me," said his father.

So they rode home, and when they came to the dun, the King had his son
into his treasury.  "Here," said he, "is the touchstone which shows
truth; for there is no truth but plain truth; and if you will look in
this, you will see yourself as you are."

And the younger son looked in it, and saw his face as it were the face of
a beardless youth, and he was well enough pleased; for the thing was a
piece of a mirror.

"Here is no such great thing to make a work about," said he; "but if it
will get me the maid I shall never complain.  But what a fool is my
brother to ride into the world, and the thing all the while at home!"

So they rode back to the other dun, and showed the mirror to the King
that was a priest; and when he had looked in it, and seen himself like a
King, and his house like a King's house, and all things like themselves,
he cried out and blessed God.  "For now I know," said he, "there is no
truth but the plain truth; and I am a King indeed, although my heart
misgave me."  And he pulled down his temple, and built a new one; and
then the younger son was married to the maid.

In the meantime the elder son rode into the world to find the touchstone
of the trial of truth; and whenever he came to a place of habitation, he
would ask the men if they had heard of it.  And in every place the men
answered: "Not only have we heard of it, but we alone, of all men,
possess the thing itself, and it hangs in the side of our chimney to this
day".  Then would the elder son be glad, and beg for a sight of it.  And
sometimes it would be a piece of mirror, that showed the seeming of
things; and then he would say, "This can never be, for there should be
more than seeming".  And sometimes it would be a lump of coal, which
showed nothing; and then he would say, "This can never be, for at least
there is the seeming".  And sometimes it would be a touchstone indeed,
beautiful in hue, adorned with polishing, the light inhabiting its sides;
and when he found this, he would beg the thing, and the persons of that
place would give it him, for all men were very generous of that gift; so
that at the last he had his wallet full of them, and they chinked
together when he rode; and when he halted by the side of the way he would
take them out and try them, till his head turned like the sails upon a
windmill.

"A murrain upon this business!" said the elder son, "for I perceive no
end to it.  Here I have the red, and here the blue and the green; and to
me they seem all excellent, and yet shame each other.  A murrain on the
trade!  If it were not for the King that is a priest and whom I have
called my father, and if it were not for the fair maid of the dun that
makes my mouth to sing and my heart enlarge, I would even tumble them all
into the salt sea, and go home and be a King like other folk."

But he was like the hunter that has seen a stag upon a mountain, so that
the night may fall, and the fire be kindled, and the lights shine in his
house; but desire of that stag is single in his bosom.

Now after many years the elder son came upon the sides of the salt sea;
and it was night, and a savage place, and the clamour of the sea was
loud.  There he was aware of a house, and a man that sat there by the
light of a candle, for he had no fire.  Now the elder son came in to him,
and the man gave him water to drink, for he had no bread; and wagged his
head when he was spoken to, for he had no words.

"Have you the touchstone of truth?" asked the elder son and when the man
had wagged his head, "I might have known that," cried the elder son.  "I
have here a wallet full of them!"  And with that he laughed, although his
heart was weary.

And with that the man laughed too, and with the fuff of his laughter the
candle went out.

"Sleep," said the man, "for now I think you have come far enough; and
your quest is ended, and my candle is out."

Now when the morning came, the man gave him a clear pebble in his hand,
and it had no beauty and no colour; and the elder son looked upon it
scornfully and shook his head; and he went away, for it seemed a small
affair to him.

All that day he rode, and his mind was quiet, and the desire of the chase
allayed.  "How if this poor pebble be the touchstone, after all?" said
he: and he got down from his horse, and emptied forth his wallet by the
side of the way.  Now, in the light of each other, all the touchstones
lost their hue and fire, and withered like stars at morning; but in the
light of the pebble, their beauty remained, only the pebble was the most
bright.  And the elder son smote upon his brow.  "How if this be the
truth?" he cried, "that all are a little true?"  And he took the pebble,
and turned its light upon the heavens, and they deepened about him like
the pit; and he turned it on the hills, and the hills were cold and
rugged, but life ran in their sides so that his own life bounded; and he
turned it on the dust, and he beheld the dust with joy and terror; and he
turned it on himself, and kneeled down and prayed.

"Now, thanks be to God," said the elder son, "I have found the
touchstone; and now I may turn my reins, and ride home to the King and to
the maid of the dun that makes my mouth to sing and my heart enlarge."

Now when he came to the dun, he saw children playing by the gate where
the King had met him in the old days; and this stayed his pleasure, for
he thought in his heart, "It is here my children should be playing".  And
when he came into the hall, there was his brother on the high seat and
the maid beside him; and at that his anger rose, for he thought in his
heart, "It is I that should be sitting there, and the maid beside me".

"Who are you?" said his brother.  "And what make you in the dun?"

"I am your elder brother," he replied.  "And I am come to marry the maid,
for I have brought the touchstone of truth."

Then the younger brother laughed aloud.  "Why," said he, "I found the
touchstone years ago, and married the maid, and there are our children
playing at the gate."

Now at this the elder brother grew as gray as the dawn.  "I pray you have
dealt justly," said he, "for I perceive my life is lost."

"Justly?" quoth the younger brother.  "It becomes you ill, that are a
restless man and a runagate, to doubt my justice, or the King my
father's, that are sedentary folk and known in the land."

"Nay," said the elder brother, "you have all else, have patience also;
and suffer me to say the world is full of touchstones, and it appears not
easily which is true."

"I have no shame of mine," said the younger brother.  "There it is, and
look in it."

So the elder brother looked in the mirror, and he was sore amazed; for he
was an old man, and his hair was white upon his head; and he sat down in
the hall and wept aloud.

"Now," said the younger brother, "see what a fool's part you have played,
that ran over all the world to seek what was lying in our father's
treasury, and came back an old carle for the dogs to bark at, and without
chick or child.  And I that was dutiful and wise sit here crowned with
virtues and pleasures, and happy in the light of my hearth."

"Methinks you have a cruel tongue," said the elder brother; and he pulled
out the clear pebble and turned its light on his brother; and behold the
man was lying, his soul was shrunk into the smallness of a pea, and his
heart was a bag of little fears like scorpions, and love was dead in his
bosom.  And at that the elder brother cried out aloud, and turned the
light of the pebble on the maid, and, lo! she was but a mask of a woman,
and withinside's she was quite dead, and she smiled as a clock ticks, and
knew not wherefore.

"Oh, well," said the elder brother, "I perceive there is both good and
bad.  So fare ye all as well as ye may in the dun; but I will go forth
into the world with my pebble in my pocket."




XIX.--THE POOR THING.


There was a man in the islands who fished for his bare bellyful, and took
his life in his hands to go forth upon the sea between four planks.  But
though he had much ado, he was merry of heart; and the gulls heard him
laugh when the spray met him.  And though he had little lore, he was
sound of spirit; and when the fish came to his hook in the mid-waters, he
blessed God without weighing.  He was bitter poor in goods and bitter
ugly of countenance, and he had no wife.

It fell in the time of the fishing that the man awoke in his house about
the midst of the afternoon.  The fire burned in the midst, and the smoke
went up and the sun came down by the chimney.  And the man was aware of
the likeness of one that warmed his hands at the red peats.

"I greet you," said the man, "in the name of God."

"I greet you," said he that warmed his hands, "but not in the name of
God, for I am none of His; nor in the name of Hell, for I am not of Hell.
For I am but a bloodless thing, less than wind and lighter than a sound,
and the wind goes through me like a net, and I am broken by a sound and
shaken by the cold."

"Be plain with me," said the man, "and tell me your name and of your
nature."

"My name," quoth the other, "is not yet named, and my nature not yet
sure.  For I am part of a man; and I was a part of your fathers, and went
out to fish and fight with them in the ancient days.  But now is my turn
not yet come; and I wait until you have a wife, and then shall I be in
your son, and a brave part of him, rejoicing manfully to launch the boat
into the surf, skilful to direct the helm, and a man of might where the
ring closes and the blows are going."

"This is a marvellous thing to hear," said the man; "and if you are
indeed to be my son, I fear it will go ill with you; for I am bitter poor
in goods and bitter ugly in face, and I shall never get me a wife if I
live to the age of eagles."

"All this hate I come to remedy, my Father," said the Poor Thing; "for we
must go this night to the little isle of sheep, where our fathers lie in
the dead-cairn, and to-morrow to the Earl's Hall, and there shall you
find a wife by my providing."

So the man rose and put forth his boat at the time of the sunsetting; and
the Poor Thing sat in the prow, and the spray blew through his bones like
snow, and the wind whistled in his teeth, and the boat dipped not with
the weight of him.

"I am fearful to see you, my son," said the man.  "For methinks you are
no thing of God."

"It is only the wind that whistles in my teeth," said the Poor Thing,
"and there is no life in me to keep it out."

So they came to the little isle of sheep, where the surf burst all about
it in the midst of the sea, and it was all green with bracken, and all
wet with dew, and the moon enlightened it.  They ran the boat into a
cove, and set foot to land; and the man came heavily behind among the
rocks in the deepness of the bracken, but the Poor Thing went before him
like a smoke in the light of the moon.  So they came to the dead-cairn,
and they laid their ears to the stones; and the dead complained
withinsides like a swarm of bees: "Time was that marrow was in our bones,
and strength in our sinews; and the thoughts of our head were clothed
upon with acts and the words of men.  But now are we broken in sunder,
and the bonds of our bones are loosed, and our thoughts lie in the dust."

Then said the Poor Thing: "Charge them that they give you the virtue they
withheld".

And the man said: "Bones of my fathers, greeting! for I am sprung of your
loins.  And now, behold, I break open the piled stones of your cairn, and
I let in the noon between your ribs.  Count it well done, for it was to
be; and give me what I come seeking in the name of blood and in the name
of God."

And the spirits of the dead stirred in the cairn like ants; and they
spoke: "You have broken the roof of our cairn and let in the noon between
our ribs; and you have the strength of the still-living.  But what virtue
have we? what power? or what jewel here in the dust with us, that any
living man should covet or receive it? for we are less than nothing.  But
we tell you one thing, speaking with many voices like bees, that the way
is plain before all like the grooves of launching: So forth into life and
fear not, for so did we all in the ancient ages."  And their voices
passed away like an eddy in a river.

"Now," said the Poor Thing, "they have told you a lesson, but make them
give you a gift.  Stoop your hand among the bones without drawback, and
you shall find their treasure."

So the man stooped his hand, and the dead laid hold upon it many and
faint like ants; but he shook them off, and behold, what he brought up in
his hand was the shoe of a horse, and it was rusty.

"It is a thing of no price," quoth the man, "for it is rusty."

"We shall see that," said the Poor Thing; "for in my thought it is a good
thing to do what our fathers did, and to keep what they kept without
question.  And in my thought one thing is as good as another in this
world; and a shoe of a horse will do."

Now they got into their boat with the horseshoe, and when the dawn was
come they were aware of the smoke of the Earl's town and the bells of the
Kirk that beat.  So they set foot to shore; and the man went up to the
market among the fishers over against the palace and the Kirk; and he was
bitter poor and bitter ugly, and he had never a fish to sell, but only a
shoe of a horse in his creel, and it rusty.

"Now," said the Poor Thing, "do so and so, and you shall find a wife and
I a mother."

It befell that the Earl's daughter came forth to go into the Kirk upon
her prayers; and when she saw the poor man stand in the market with only
the shoe of a horse, and it rusty, it came in her mind it should be a
thing of price.

"What is that?" quoth she.

"It is a shoe of a horse," said the man.

"And what is the use of it?" quoth the Earl's daughter.

"It is for no use," said the man.

"I may not believe that," said she; "else why should you carry it?"

"I do so," said he, "because it was so my fathers did in the ancient
ages; and I have neither a better reason nor a worse."

Now the Earl's daughter could not find it in her mind to believe him.
"Come," quoth she, "sell me this, for I am sure it is a thing of price."

"Nay," said the man, "the thing is not for sale."

"What!" cried the Earl's daughter.  "Then what make you here in the
town's market, with the thing in your creel and nought beside?"

"I sit here," says the man, "to get me a wife."

"There is no sense in any of these answers," thought the Earl's daughter;
"and I could find it in my heart to weep."

By came the Earl upon that; and she called him and told him all.  And
when he had heard, he was of his daughter's mind that this should be a
thing of virtue; and charged the man to set a price upon the thing, or
else be hanged upon the gallows; and that was near at hand, so that the
man could see it.

"The way of life is straight like the grooves of launching," quoth the
man.  "And if I am to be hanged let me be hanged."

"Why!" cried the Earl, "will you set your neck against a shoe of a horse,
and it rusty?"

"In my thought," said the man, "one thing is as good as another in this
world and a shoe of a horse will do."

"This can never be," thought the Earl; and he stood and looked upon the
man, and bit his beard.

And the man looked up at him and smiled.  "It was so my fathers did in
the ancient ages," quoth he to the Earl, "and I have neither a better
reason nor a worse."

"There is no sense in any of this," thought the Earl, "and I must be
growing old."  So he had his daughter on one side, and says he: "Many
suitors have you denied, my child.  But here is a very strange matter
that a man should cling so to a shoe of a horse, and it rusty; and that
he should offer it like a thing on sale, and yet not sell it; and that he
should sit there seeking a wife.  If I come not to the bottom of this
thing, I shall have no more pleasure in bread; and I can see no way, but
either I should hang or you should marry him."

"By my troth, but he is bitter ugly," said the Earl's daughter.  "How if
the gallows be so near at hand?"

"It was not so," said the Earl, "that my fathers did in the ancient ages.
I am like the man, and can give you neither a better reason nor a worse.
But do you, prithee, speak with him again."

So the Earl's daughter spoke to the man.  "If you were not so bitter
ugly," quoth she, "my father the Earl would have us marry."

"Bitter ugly am I," said the man, "and you as fair as May.  Bitter ugly I
am, and what of that?  It was so my fathers--"

"In the name of God," said the Earl's daughter, "let your fathers be!"

"If I had done that," said the man, "you had never been chaffering with
me here in the market, nor your father the Earl watching with the end of
his eye."

"But come," quoth the Earl's daughter, "this is a very strange thing,
that you would have me wed for a shoe of a horse, and it rusty."

"In my thought," quoth the man, "one thing is as good--"

"Oh, spare me that," said the Earl's daughter, "and tell me why I should
marry."


"Listen and look," said the man.

Now the wind blew through the Poor Thing like an infant crying, so that
her heart was melted; and her eyes were unsealed, and she was aware of
the thing as it were a babe unmothered, and she took it to her arms, and
it melted in her arms like the air.

"Come," said the man, "behold a vision of our children, the busy hearth,
and the white heads.  And let that suffice, for it is all God offers."

"I have no delight in it," said she; but with that she sighed.

"The ways of life are straight like the grooves of launching," said the
man; and he took her by the hand.

"And what shall we do with the horseshoe?" quoth she.

"I will give it to your father," said the man; "and he can make a kirk
and a mill of it for me."


It came to pass in time that the Poor Thing was born; but memory of these
matters slept within him, and he knew not that which he had done.  But he
was a part of the eldest son; rejoicing manfully to launch the boat into
the surf, skilful to direct the helm, and a man of might where the ring
closes and the blows are going.




XX.--THE SONG OF THE MORROW.


The King of Duntrine had a daughter when he was old, and she was the
fairest King's daughter between two seas; her hair was like spun gold,
and her eyes like pools in a river; and the King gave her a castle upon
the sea beach, with a terrace, and a court of the hewn stone, and four
towers at the four corners.  Here she dwelt and grew up, and had no care
for the morrow, and no power upon the hour, after the manner of simple
men.

It befell that she walked one day by the beach of the sea, when it was
autumn, and the wind blew from the place of rains; and upon the one hand
of her the sea beat, and upon the other the dead leaves ran.  This was
the loneliest beach between two seas, and strange things had been done
there in the ancient ages.  Now the King's daughter was aware of a crone
that sat upon the beach.  The sea foam ran to her feet, and the dead
leaves swarmed about her back, and the rags blew about her face in the
blowing of the wind.

"Now," said the King's daughter, and she named a holy name, "this is the
most unhappy old crone between two seas."

"Daughter of a King," said the crone, "you dwell in a stone house, and
your hair is like the gold: but what is your profit?  Life is not long,
nor lives strong; and you live after the way of simple men, and have no
thought for the morrow and no power upon the hour."

"Thought for the morrow, that I have," said the King's daughter; "but
power upon the hour, that have I not."  And she mused with herself.

Then the crone smote her lean hands one within the other, and laughed
like a sea-gull.  "Home!" cried she.  "O daughter of a King, home to your
stone house; for the longing is come upon you now, nor can you live any
more after the manner of simple men.  Home, and toil and suffer, till the
gift come that will make you bare, and till the man come that will bring
you care."

The King's daughter made no more ado, but she turned about and went home
to her house in silence.  And when she was come into her chamber she
called for her nurse.

"Nurse," said the King's daughter, "thought is come upon me for the
morrow, so that I can live no more after the manner of simple men.  Tell
me what I must do that I may have power upon the hour."

Then the nurse moaned like a snow wind.  "Alas!" said she, "that this
thing should be; but the thought is gone into your marrow, nor is there
any cure against the thought.  Be it so, then, even as you will; though
power is less than weakness, power shall you have; and though the thought
is colder than winter, yet shall you think it to an end."

So the King's daughter sat in her vaulted chamber in the masoned house,
and she thought upon the thought.  Nine years she sat; and the sea beat
upon the terrace, and the gulls cried about the turrets, and wind crooned
in the chimneys of the house.  Nine years she came not abroad, nor tasted
the clean air, neither saw God's sky.  Nine years she sat and looked
neither to the right nor to the left, nor heard speech of any one, but
thought upon the thought of the morrow.  And her nurse fed her in
silence, and she took of the food with her left hand, and ate it without
grace.

Now when the nine years were out, it fell dusk in the autumn, and there
came a sound in the wind like a sound of piping.  At that the nurse
lifted up her finger in the vaulted house.

"I hear a sound in the wind," said she, "that is like the sound of
piping."

"It is but a little sound," said the King's daughter, "but yet is it
sound enough for me."

So they went down in the dusk to the doors of the house, and along the
beach of the sea.  And the waves beat upon the one hand, and upon the
other the dead leaves ran; and the clouds raced in the sky, and the gulls
flew widdershins.  And when they came to that part of the beach where
strange things had been done in the ancient ages, lo, there was the
crone, and she was dancing widdershins.

"What makes you dance widdershins, old crone?" said the King's daughter;
"here upon the bleak beach, between the waves and the dead leaves?"

"I hear a sound in the wind that is like a sound of piping," quoth she.
"And it is for that that I dance widdershins.  For the gift comes that
will make you bare, and the man comes that must bring you care.  But for
me the morrow is come that I have thought upon, and the hour of my
power."

"How comes it, crone," said the King's daughter, "that you waver like a
rag, and pale like a dead leaf before my eyes?"

"Because the morrow has come that I have thought upon, and the hour of my
power," said the crone; and she fell on the beach, and, lo! she was but
stalks of the sea tangle, and dust of the sea sand, and the sand lice
hopped upon the place of her.

"This is the strangest thing that befell between two seas," said the
King's daughter of Duntrine.

But the nurse broke out and moaned like an autumn gale.  "I am weary of
the wind," quoth she; and she bewailed her day.

The King's daughter was aware of a man upon the beach; he went hooded so
that none might perceive his face, and a pipe was underneath his arm.  The
sound of his pipe was like singing wasps, and like the wind that sings in
windlestraw; and it took hold upon men's ears like the crying of gulls.

"Are you the comer?" quoth the King's daughter of Duntrine.

"I am the corner," said he, "and these are the pipes that a man may hear,
and I have power upon the hour, and this is the song of the morrow."  And
he piped the song of the morrow, and it was as long as years; and the
nurse wept out aloud at the hearing of it.

"This is true," said the King's daughter, "that you pipe the song of the
morrow; but that ye have power upon the hour, how may I know that?  Show
me a marvel here upon the beach, between the waves and the dead leaves."

And the man said, "Upon whom?"

"Here is my nurse," quoth the King's daughter.  "She is weary of the
wind.  Show me a good marvel upon her."

And, lo! the nurse fell upon the beach as it were two handfuls of dead
leaves, and the wind whirled them widdershins, and the sand lice hopped
between.

"It is true," said the King's daughter of Duntrine, "you are the comer,
and you have power upon the hour.  Come with me to my stone house."

So they went by the sea margin, and the man piped the song of the morrow,
and the leaves followed behind them as they went.

Then they sat down together; and the sea beat on the terrace, and the
gulls cried about the towers, and the wind crooned in the chimneys of the
house.  Nine years they sat, and every year when it fell autumn, the man
said, "This is the hour, and I have power in it"; and the daughter of the
King said, "Nay, but pipe me the song of the morrow".  And he piped it,
and it was long like years.

Now when the nine years were gone, the King's daughter of Duntrine got
her to her feet, like one that remembers; and she looked about her in the
masoned house; and all her servants were gone; only the man that piped
sat upon the terrace with the hand upon his face; and as he piped the
leaves ran about the terrace and the sea beat along the wall.  Then she
cried to him with a great voice, "This is the hour, and let me see the
power in it".  And with that the wind blew off the hood from the man's
face, and, lo! there was no man there, only the clothes and the hood and
the pipes tumbled one upon another in a corner of the terrace, and the
dead leaves ran over them.

And the King's daughter of Duntrine got her to that part of the beach
where strange things had been done in the ancient ages; and there she sat
her down.  The sea foam ran to her feet, and the dead leaves swarmed
about her back, and the veil blew about her face in the blowing of the
wind.  And when she lifted up her eyes, there was the daughter of a King
come walking on the beach.  Her hair was like the spun gold, and her eyes
like pools in a river, and she had no thought for the morrow and no power
upon the hour, after the manner of simple men.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FABLES***


******* This file should be named 343.txt or 343.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/4/343



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

